BOOK: history-of-ancient-and-early-medieval-india CHAPTER: Emerging Regional Configurations PAGES: 601-680 of gana and sangha as ‘republic’ is misleading. These were oligarchies, where power was exercised by a group of people. The most powerful states in the 6th century BCE were Magadha, Kosala, Vatsa, and Avanti. The relations among the states fluctuated over time and included warfare, truce, and military alliances. Marriage alliances too were an important aspect of inter-state relations, but often became irrelevant when it came to realizing political ambitions. Outlines of political history can be reconstructed by using the various literary sources of this as well as later periods (Raychaudhuri , 2000: 85–210). The kingdom of Kashi was bounded by the Varuna and Asi rivers to the north and south respectively. It is from the names of these two rivers that its capital city Varanasi (modern Benaras), on the banks of the Ganga, got its name. The Jatakas indicate that several Kashi kings aspired to the status of political paramountcy. They refer to a longstanding rivalry between the kingdoms of Kashi and Kosala. Kashi was also involved in occasional conflicts with Anga and Magadha. At one time, one of the most powerful states of north India, Kashi was eventually absorbed into the Kosalan kingdom. SILVER PUNCH-MARKED COINS OF KASHI, KOSALA, AND MAGADHA The powerful kingdom of Kosala was bounded by the Sadanira (Gandak) on the east, the Gomati on the west, the Sarpika or Syandika (Sai) on the south, and the Nepal hills to the north. The Sarayu river divided it into a northern and a southern part. Shravasti (identified with modern Saheth-Maheth) was the capital of north Kosala, and Kushavati the capital of south Kosala. Saketa and Ayodhya were two other important towns and may once have been political centres. Lesser towns included Setavya, Ukkattha, and Kitagiri. Kosala succeeded in Lesser towns included Setavya, Ukkattha, and Kitagiri. Kosala succeeded in conquering Kashi. It extended its power over the Sakyas of Kapilavastu, and also probably over the Kalamas of Kesaputta and other states in the vicinity. Pasenadi (Prasenajit), king of Kosala, was the Buddha’s contemporary and is frequently mentioned in Pali texts. Kosala and Magadha were linked through matrimonial ties during the time of Prasenajit and the Magadhan king Bimbisara, but a bitter struggle between the two kingdoms ensued after the latter’s death. Anga corresponded roughly to the present-day Bhagalpur and Monghyr districts of Bihar. The Ganga bordered it on the north. The Champa river (which can probably be identified with the Chandan) was its boundary with Magadha, which lay to its west. Its capital Champa (once known as Malini) was one of the greatest cities of the 6th century BCE. Located at the confluence of the Ganga and Champa rivers, it has been identified with modern Champanagara or Champapura village near Bhagalpur. Champa was also an important commercial centre on the trade routes of the time. Merchants are described as sailing overseas from here to Suvarnabhumi (probably in Southeast Asia). The kingdom of Magadha roughly covered the modern Patna and Gaya districts of Bihar. It was bounded by the Ganga, Son, and Champa rivers on the north, west, and east respectively and the Vindhyan spurs on the south. Its capital was initially Girivraja or Rajagriha, near modern Rajgir. The Puranas give lists of Magadhan kings, starting with Brihadratha. This dynasty came to an end in the 6th century BCE, making way for the Haryankas. The detailed history of Magadha is given later in this chapter. The principality of the Vajji (Vrijji) was in eastern India, north of the Ganga, extending up to the Nepal hills. Most historians consider the Vajji a confederacy of eight or nine clans. This is based on a reference in Buddhaghosha’s Sumangala Vilasini to the atthakulikas of the Vajjis as one of the legal tribunals of Vaishali. However, the atthakulikas may actually have been a body consisting of the eight leading families of Vaishali. The most important members of the confederacy were the Vajjis, Lichchhavis, Videhas, and Nayas/Jnatrikas. We know little about other affiliated clans such as the Ugras, Bhogas, Kauravas, and Aikshvakas. Vaishali was both the capital of the Lichchhavis and of the Vajji confederacy, and is identified with modern Basarh in north Bihar. The Lichchhavis are mentioned often in Buddhist texts. They were on good terms with Kosala and the Mallas, but were embroiled in conflict with Magadha. Jaina tradition states that the nine Lichchhavis formed a league with the nine Mallas and 18 clan lords of Kashi and Koshala. The Videhas had their capital at Mithila, identified with modern Janakpur in Nepal. The Jnatrikas were based in Kundapura (or Kundagrama) and Kollaga, suburbs of Vaishali. Mahavira belonged to this clan. The Vajji confederacy is said to have been led by Chetaka, who was the brother of Trishala (mother of Mahavira) and father of Chellana, wife of the Magadhan king Bimbisara. MAP 6.1 THE 16 MAHAJANAPADAS The Malla principality was located to the west of the Vajjis and consisted of a confederacy of nine clans. There were two political centres—at Kusinara and Pava. Kusinara has been identified with Kasia on the smaller Gandak, about 77 km east of Gorakhpur, and Pava with Padaraona village, about 26 km north-east of Kasia. The Mallas are said to have originally been a monarchy. The Vajjis and of Kasia. The Mallas are said to have originally been a monarchy. The Vajjis and Mallas seem to have been allies, although there were some episodes of conflict between them. The Chedi kingdom was situated in the eastern part of Bundelkhand in central India. Its capital was Sotthivatinagara, probably the same as the Shuktimati or Shuktisahvaya of the Mahabharata. Vatsa or Vamsa, south of the Ganga, was noted for its fine cotton textiles. Its capital was Kaushambi, identified with Kosam village on the right bank of the Yamuna. Legends recount the rivalry between kings Udayana of Vatsa and Pradyota of Avanti, and refer to a love affair and marriage between Udayana and Vasavadatta, Pradyota’s daughter. Udayana also seems to have entered into matrimonial alliances with the ruling families of Anga and Magadha. This king went on to become the romantic hero of three Sanskrit dramas of later times— the Svapna-Vasavadatta of Bhasa and the Ratnavali and Priyadarshika of Harsha. According to Buddhist tradition, the Kuru kingdom was ruled by kings belonging to the Yuddhitthila gotta, i.e., the family of Yudhishthira, from their capital at Indapatta (Indraprastha). In the Buddha’s time, Kuru was a minor state ruled by a chieftain named Koravya. The Jaina Uttaradhyayana Sutra refers to a Kuru king named Isukara who ruled from the town of Isukara. The Kurus established matrimonial relations with the Yadavas, Bhojas, and Panchalas. Up to the time of the Buddha, the Kurus were a monarchy; subsequently, they became a sangha. The kingdom of Panchala included the Rohilkhand area and part of the central doab region, and was divided into two parts by the Ganga. The capital of Uttara (north) Panchala was Ahichchhatra (identified with modern Ramnagar in Bareilly district, UP), and that of Dakshina (south) Panchala was Kampilya (identified with Kampil in Farukkhabad district, UP). The famous city of Kanyakubja or Kanauj was located in this kingdom. Several ancient texts mention a king named Chulani Brahmadatta. Going by the testimony of the Arthashastra, the Panchalas seem to have later switched to an oligarchic form of government. The principality of the Matsyas was located in the Jaipur area in Rajasthan, extending into the Alwar and Bharatpur areas as well. Their capital was Viratanagara (modern Bairat), named after Virata, founder of the kingdom. Buddhist texts usually associate the Matsyas with the Shurasenas. The Shurasenas had their capital at Mathura (also known as Madura) on the Yamuna. Buddhist tradition describes Avantiputra, king of the Shurasenas, as a disciple of the Buddha. This king’s name (literally, ‘son of Avanti’) suggests the possibility of a matrimonial alliance between Shurasena and Avanti. The Mahabharata and the Puranas refer to rulers of the Mathura region as the Yadu or Yadavas, who included the Vrishnis. Texts such as the Ashtadhyayi, Markandeya Purana, Brihatsamhita, and the Greek accounts suggest that the Assaka (Ashmaka/Ashvaka) kingdom was situated in the northwest. However, the Assaka of Buddhist texts is firmly located on the Godavari river. Its capital was Potana/Podana or Potali, identified with modern Bodhan. The Godavari separated Assaka from the neighbouring kingdom of Mulaka or Alaka with its capital at Pratishthana (identified with modern Paithan). Jataka stories suggest that Assaka may at some point have come under the sway of Kashi and that it achieved a military victory over Kalinga in eastern India. Avanti, in the Malwa region of central India, was divided into a northern and a southern part by the Vindhyas. The two important towns of this kingdom were Mahishmati (identified with modern Maheshwar) and Ujjayini (near modern Ujjain), both of which are mentioned in ancient texts as its capital. These two cities were important points on trade routes that connected north India, both with the Deccan and with ports on the western coast. Pradyota was a famous king of Avanti, during whose time this kingdom was involved in conflicts with Vatsa, Magadha, and Kosala. The kingdom of Gandhara comprised modern Peshawar and Rawalpindi districts of Pakistan and the Kashmir valley. Its capital Takshashila (Taxila) was a major centre of trade and learning. King Pukkusati or Pushkarasarin ruled over Gandhara in the mid-6th century BCE. He had cordial relations with Magadha, and waged a successful war against Avanti. The Behistun inscription of the Achaemenid emperor Darius indicates that Gandhara was conquered by the Persians in the later part of the 6th century BCE. Ancient texts and inscriptions usually associate the kingdom of Kamboja with Gandhara. Kamboja included the area around Rajaori, including the Hazara district of the NorthWest Frontier Province of Pakistan, and probably extended up to Kafiristan. The Kambojas were a monarchy in the 6th century BCE, but the Arthashastra refers to them as a sangha. GANDHARA PUNCH-MARKED COIN FURTHER DISCUSSION The identification of Taxila ALEXANDER CUNNINGHAM (1814–93) Many of the major cities mentioned in ancient Indian texts were identified in the 19th century. One of the men who made a major contribution in this field was Alexander Cunningham, an archaeologist who went on to become the first Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India in 1871. Like others, Cunningham pieced together valuable clues to the location of ancient Indian cities from details given in the classical Graeco-Roman accounts and the travelogues of the Chinese pilgrims Xuanzang and Faxian. Unlike others, however, he routinely confirmed his identifications through field surveys. Cunningham counted among his major achievements the identifications of Aornos, Taxila, Sangala, Srughna, Ahichchhatra, Bairat, Sankisa, Shravasti, Kaushambi, Padmavati, Vaishali, and Nalanda. Cunningham had initially identified the site of ancient Taxila (Takshashila) with Manikyala. However, his explorations at Shah-dheri in 1863–64 convinced him that the correct identification lay here. The following extract reveals how he reached this conclusion: The position of the celebrated city of Taxila has hitherto remained unknown, partly owing to the erroneous distance recorded by Pliny, and partly to the want of information regarding the vast ruins which still exist in the vicinity of Shah-dheri. All the copies of Pliny agree in stating that Taxila was only 60 Roman, or 55 English, miles from Peucolaitis, or Hashtnagar, which would fix its site somewhere on the Haro river, to the west of Hasan Abdal, or just two days’ march from the Indus. But the itineraries of the Chinese pilgrims agree in placing it at three days’ journey to the east of the Indus, or in the immediate neighbourhood of Kala-ka-sarai, which was the third halting- place of the Mogul emperors, and which is still the third stage from the Indus, both for troops and baggage. Now as Hwen Thsang, on his return to China, was accompanied by laden elephants, his three days’ journey from Takhshasila [sic] to the Indus at Utakhanda, or Ohind, must necessarily have been of the same length as those of modern days, and, consequently, the site of the city must be looked for somewhere in the neighbourhood of Kala-ka- sarai. This site is found near Shah-dheri, just one mile to the north-east of Kala-ka-sarai, in the extensive ruins of a fortified city, around which I was able to trace no less than 55 stupas, of which two are as large as the great Manikyala tope (i.e., stupa), 28 monasteries, and nine temples. Now the distance from Shah-dheri to Ohind is 36 miles, and from Ohind to Hashtnagar is 38 more, or altogether 74 miles, which is 19 in excess of the distance recorded by Pliny between Taxila and Peukelaotis [sic]. To reconcile these discrepant numbers I would suggest that Pliny’s 60 miles or LX, should be read as 80 miles or LXXX, which are equivalent to 73½ English miles, or within half a mile of the actual distance between the two places…. Then follows a discussion of the history of Taxila and a detailed description of the mounds at the site, namely Bhir, Hathial, Sirkap, Kacha-kot, Babar Khana, and Sirsukh. …In closing my account of the extensive ruins near Shah-dheri, which I have endeavoured to identify with the famous Taxila of the Greeks, I may remark that the identification is most satisfactorily confirmed by the bearings and distances of the next two places visited by Hwen Thsang, both of which will be now described under the names of Hasan Abdal and Baoti Pind. The ruins be now described under the names of Hasan Abdal and Baoti Pind. The ruins at these places form, what may be called, the western group of the suburban or outlying remains of Taxila, the ancient capital of the Panjab. SOURCE Cunningham, 1871: 111–35 The Ganas or Sanghas Ancient Indian texts recognize the difference between the political structure and functioning of the rajyas and the ganas or sanghas. Two of the mahajanapadas, the Vajji and Malla, were sanghas. Buddhist texts mention others as well—the Sakyas of Kapilavastu, Koliyas of Devadaha and Ramagrama, Bulis of Alakappa, Kalamas of Kesaputta, Moriyas of Pipphalivana, and Bhaggas (Bhargas) with their capital on Sumsumara hill. It is interesting to note that most of the ganas, especially the politically important ones, were located in or near the Himalayan foothills in eastern India, while the major kingdoms occupied the fertile alluvial tracts of the Ganga valley. The ganas had greater vestiges of tribal organization than the monarchies. Some may have simply been more complex political forms of older tribal formations. Others may have been created through the subversion of monarchical rule: For instance, the Videhas were apparently originally a monarchy, but had become a gana by the 6th century BCE. The Kurus were a monarchy at this time, but became a gana a few centuries later. There were two kinds of ganas—those that consisted of all or a section of one clan, e.g., the Sakyas and Koliyas; and those that comprised a confederation of several clans, like the Vajjis and Yadavas. The confederacies suggest the existence of a self- conscious political identity among the ganas. The Sakyas claimed to belong to the Ikshvaku family and the solar dynasty. Their principality was bounded on the east by the Rohini river, the Rapti river to the west and south, and the Himalaya mountains to the north. There is still considerable debate over the location of its capital, Kapilavastu. Some scholars locate it at Tilaurakot, but there is better reason to locate it at Piprahwa- Ganwaria. The amount of detail regarding the Sakyas in Buddhist texts is due to the fact that the Buddha belonged to this clan. The Sakyas were connected through marriage to the royal house of Kosala. Buddhist texts clearly indicate through marriage to the royal house of Kosala. Buddhist texts clearly indicate that the Sakya assembly gathered to discuss important business such as forging alliances, embarking on war, and concluding peace. The principality of the Koliyas of Ramagrama lay to the east of the Sakyas, the Rohini river forming the boundary between the two. Some texts suggest that the two peoples were related to each other. The Bhaggas seem to have been located in the Vindhyan region, between the Yamuna and Son rivers, and were apparently subordinate to the Vatsas. Little is known about the other ganas. Early studies on the ganas by Nationalist historians (see, for instance, Jayaswal, 1943) tended to glorify them by exaggerating their democratic features. Comparisons were made with the republics of Greece and Rome and with modern political institutions. A lot of this was no doubt to disprove the assertions of Western scholars that Indians had never known anything other than despotic rule. Later writings (e.g., J. P. Sharma, 1968) adopted a more dispassionate approach. Governance in these polities was certainly marked by a corporate element. The Arthashastra, a later text, outlines the special strategies that the would-be conqueror could use to vanquish the ganas. Because they were different, the strategies recommended to defeat monarchies would not work, and Kautilya’s advice focused on creating dissension among their ranks. FURTHER DISCUSSION The conflict between the Sakyas and Kosalans Buddhist tradition narrates the following story of how relations between the Kosalans and Sakyas soured due to a trick played by the latter on Prasenajit: Prasenajit, king of Kosala, was an admirer of the Buddha, and hit upon the idea of marrying into the Sakya clan, to which the Buddha belonged. He requested the Sakyas for one of their princesses as a wife. The Sakyas were too proud of their lineage to hand over one of their women, but given the power of Prasenajit, were afraid to refuse. So they resorted to a strategem. They passed on a slave girl Vasabhakkhattiya, daughter of a Sakya chief Mahanaman by a slave woman, concealing her low parentage on her mother’s side. Vidudabha and Vajira were the son and daughter born of this mother’s side. Vidudabha and Vajira were the son and daughter born of this marriage. At some point of time, Vidudabha paid a visit to his maternal grandfather’s home and learnt of his mother’s background. The news reached Prasenajit as well. When the king realized that he had been tricked, he immediately disowned his wife and son. The Buddha mollified him by telling him that it was the father’s social status that counted, not the mother’s. Vidudabha and his mother were restored to favour due to this intercession. Vidudabha eventually succeeded his father as king, and massacred the Sakyas as revenge for their trickery. It is impossible to know for sure whether there is any historical basis to this story. But the Kosalan massacre of the Sakyas became one of many episodes remembered in later Buddhist tradition, and it is depicted vividly in relief sculpture at many stupa sites. The ancient Indian ganas were not, however, democracies. Power was vested in the hands of an aristocracy comprising the heads of leading Kshatriya families. There was no single hereditary monarch. Instead, there was a chief (known variously as ganapati, ganajyestha, ganaraja, or sanghamukhya) and an aristocratic council which met in a hall called the santhagara. Effective executive power and day-to-day political management must have been in the hands of a smaller group. Even in Athenian democracy (with which the Indian ganas were often compared), there was a tendency for power to be concentrated in a few hands. The political system of the ganas seems to have been a compromise between government by assembly and by an oligarchy within this assembly. Later texts offer many details about the Lichchhavis. For instance, the Ekapanna Jataka states that in the Lichchhavi capital of Vaishali, there were always 7,707 rajas (kings) to govern the kingdom, and a similar number of uparajas (subordinate kings), senapatis (military commanders), and bhandagarikas (treasurers). The preamble to the Chullakalinga Jataka refers to the 7,707 ruling families of the Lichchhavis and asserts that they were all given to argument and disputation. The Mahavastu, on the other hand, states there were twice 84,000, i.e., 168,000 rajas living in Vaishali. The figures mentioned in these texts cannot be taken literally, but they do suggest that the Lichchhavis had a large assembly, consisting of the heads of Kshatriya families who called themselves ‘raja’. They usually met once a year during the spring festival to transact important public business and elect their leader, who had a fixed tenure. The uparajas may have been the eldest sons of the rajas. It was at one of the annual meetings of the great assembly that the Lichchhavis honoured the beautiful courtesan Ambapali. It was also at such meetings that the rajas, old and new, bathed in the sacred pokkharani (tank) mentioned in the Bhaddasala Jataka. The Lichchhavi assembly had sovereign power and could pronounce punishments such as death or exile. Day-to-day administrative matters were dealt with by a much smaller council of nine, which carried out business in the name of the larger assembly. The assembly did not include women. It is possible, even likely, that the procedures of the Buddhist monastic order (sangha) were patterned on the sangha polities, especially the Lichchhavis. The functioning of the two institutions may have been analogous, though not identical. Meetings at the santhagara of the ganas were probably announced by the beating of a drum, and there may have been a regulator of seats. Voting was done with pieces of wood known as salakas. The collector of votes was the salaka-gahapaka, chosen for this job on account of his reputation for honesty and impartiality. The gana-puraka was responsible for ensuring the presence of a quorum, which was required for major deliberations. Buddhist and Jaina texts are more forthcoming than their Brahmanical counterparts on details regarding the ganas. This is no doubt because kingship was central to the Brahmanical social and political ideology, which equated kinglessness with anarchy. Monarchies and oligarchies had different internal power equations (Ruben , 1969). In the ganas, Brahmanas and purohitas may not have enjoyed the prestige they did in the rajyas. There are hardly any references to purohitas or gifts of land to Brahmanas in the ganas. And in the Ambattha Sutta of the Digha Nikaya, when the Brahmana Ambattha visited Kapilavastu, members of the Sakya assembly are said to have laughed at him, treating him with scant respect. The ganas were closely associated with the Kshatriyas and were named after the ruling Kshatriya clan; members were linked to each other through real or claimed kinship ties. However, apart from this hereditary elite, various other groups—Brahmanas, farmers, artisans, wage labourers, slaves, etc.—lived in these principalities and had a subordinate status, politically, and probably also economically and socially. They were not entitled to use the clan name and did not have rights of political participation. For instance, Upali, the barber who lived in Sakya territory, and Chunda, the metal smith who lived in Malla territory, were not part of the ruling elite and did not attend the assembly. The powerful monarchies of the time developed a standing army—a permanent corps of troops recruited and maintained by the state. Such an organization may not have existed in the ganas. The Lichchhavis had a strong army, but when not engaged in combat, the soldiers probably retired to their lands. PRIMARY SOURCES Vassakara seeks the Buddha’s advice on how to defeat the Vajjis The Mahaparinibbana Sutta begins with the following episode, which reflects the ganas’ points of vulnerability: Thus have I heard. The Exalted One [the Buddha] was once dwelling in Rajagaha, on the hill called Vulture’s Peak. Now at that time, Vedehiputta Ajatasattu, the king of Magadha, had made up his mind to attack the Vajjians; and he said to himself, ‘I will strike at these Vajjians, mighty and powerful though they be, I will root out these Vajjians, I will bring these Vajjians to utter ruin!’ So he said to his Brahmana minister Vassakara, ‘Go to the Exalted One, bow down in adoration at his feet on my behalf, and inquire on my behalf whether he is free from illness and suffering, enjoying ease and comfort and good health. Then tell him that I want to attack and destroy the Vajjians. And listen carefully and remember whatever he may predict, and come back and repeat it to me. For the Buddhas speak nothing untrue!’ repeat it to me. For the Buddhas speak nothing untrue!’ Vassakara and his cavalcade of chariots drove up as close as possible to Vulture’s Peak and walked the remaining distance. Vassakara approached the Buddha, exchanged greetings and compliments of politeness and courtesy, sat down respectfully by his side, and gave him the king’s message. Now at that time, the venerable Ananda was standing behind the Exalted One, fanning him. The Buddha asked him whether he had heard that the Vajjians frequently called public meetings of their clan. Ananda replied he had heard that this was so. The Buddha said, ‘So long, Ananda, as the Vajjians meet together in concord and rise in concord and carry out their undertakings in concord—so long as they enact nothing not already established, abrogate nothing that has been already enacted, and act in accordance with the ancient institutions of the Vajjians as established in former days—so long as they honour and esteem and revere and support the Vajjian elders and consider it a duty to be attentive to their words, so long as no women or girls belonging to their clans are detained among them by force or abduction, so long as they honour and esteem and revere and support the Vajjian shrines in town and country, and do not allow the proper offerings and rites as formerly established and performed to fall into disuse, so long as the rightful protection, defence, and support shall be fully provided for the Arahants [monks who had attained enlightenment] among them, so that Arahants from a distance may enter their realm and live there in ease—as long as they do all these things, the Vajjians can be expected not to decline, but to prosper.’ Then the Buddha said to Vassakara: ‘When I was once staying, Oh Brahmana, at Vesali at the Sarandada shrine, I taught the Vajjians these conditions of welfare; and as long as these conditions shall continue to exist among them, we may expect them not to decline, but to prosper.’ ‘We may expect then,’ answered the Brahmana, ‘the welfare and not the decline of the Vajjians when they are possessed of any one of these conditions of welfare, how much more so when they are possessed of all the seven. So, Gotama, the Vajjians cannot be overcome by the king of seven. So, Gotama, the Vajjians cannot be overcome by the king of Magadha; that is not in battle, without diplomacy or breaking up their alliance. And now, Gotama, we must go; we are busy and have much to do.’ ‘Whatever you think most fitting, Oh Brahmana,’ replied the Buddha. And Vassakara, delighted and pleased with the words of the Exalted One, rose from his seat and went his way. Vassakara had picked up on an important hint and was keen to start working out a strategy to overpower the Vajjis. SOURCE Rhys Davids , 1951: 78–81. There may also have been differences in patterns of land ownership. The Kshatriya political elite were probably also the largest landowners in the ganas. Walter Ruben (, 1969) suggests that the clan exercised rights over land, and private property may have been absent. Although conclusive evidence is lacking on this point, a custom supposedly practised by the Lichchhavis is suggestive. The story goes that among the Lichchhavis, an exceptionally beautiful woman (e.g., Ambapali) was not allowed to marry, but was to belong (i.e., be available) to all the Lichcchavi men. This may have been an extension of clan rights over other resources such as land. The ganas’ greatest asset—governance through discussion—was also their greatest weakness. They were vulnerable to internal dissension, especially when faced with aggressive monarchies. In the Lalitavistara, the future Buddha is described as sitting in heaven, thinking of his impending birth. One of the questions raised is: Which family should he be born in? The other bodhisattvas and gods discuss and reject the candidature of the Lichchhavis of Vaishali. They say that these people do not speak to each other in the proper manner, do not follow the dharma, do not preserve the ranks of social status and age, do not become anybody’s disciples, and each one thinks ‘I am king! I am king!’ The Arthashastra asserts that sanghas were unassailable and advises the king to win over friendly ones. It suggests that the head of a sangha should remain self- controlled and just towards other members, and should do what is beneficial and agreeable to them all. The Ashtadhyayi mentions several ganas such as the Kshudrakas, Malavas, Ambashthas, Hastinayanas, Prakanvas, Madras, Madhumantas, Apritas, Vasatis, Bhaggas, Shibis, Ashvayanas, and Ashvakayanas. Slightly later references suggest that the Vrishnis, Andhakas, and other allied tribes living in the Mathura region were part of a sangha. Vasudeva Krishna of the Vrishni clan is described as a sanghamukhya (the head of a sangha). Non-monarchical states are also mentioned in the Mahabharata, Megathenes’ Indica, and in Greek accounts of Alexander’s invasion. Names of ganas (e.g., the Yaudheyas, Malavas, Uddehikas, and Arjunayanas) occur on coins of the early centuries CE, and some are also mentioned in inscriptions. In the 4th century CE, Chandragupta I is known to have married a Lichchhavi princess, Kumaradevi, and this marriage was commemorated on gold coins. Samudragupta is known as Lichchhavi-dauhitra (grandson of the Lichchhavis) in inscriptions. Clearly, the Lichchhavis were still a political force worth making an alliance with. However, it was probably Samudragupta’s military campaigns that wiped out the ganas, or at least reduced them to a position of political insignificance. The history of the ganas of ancient India thus spans at least a thousand years, if not more. Their military defeats at the hands of monarchical states can be seen as a result of the inability of their system of governance and military organization to meet the challenges of empire building. The ambitions of monarchical states were reflected in the political vocabulary of the time, in terms such as chakravartin, samrat, and sarvabhauma. These signified a ‘universal ruler’, one who aimed at establishing his rule over all of Jambudvipa, i.e., the subcontinent. Several centuries later, the rulers of Magadha succeeded in translating this ambition into reality. Political Conflicts and the Growth of the Magadhan Empire The outlines of the rise of Magadha to political supremacy can be reconstruced by comparing the information in the Puranic, Buddhist, and Jaina texts. There are several differences in the dynastic sequences in these sources. Buddhist and Jaina traditions compete with each other in trying to establish their claims to the great kings of the time, while the Puranas disparage those who favoured these traditions. The political narrative is one of bitter political rivalries, struggles for succession, plots, murders, blood, and gore. Behind the keenly fought political succession, plots, murders, blood, and gore. Behind the keenly fought political conflicts of the time lay struggles for power over people, land, and resources. The states that won were those that had larger, stronger, better armies, and this in turn was the result of effective political strategies of administration and control. Magadha’s gradual rise to political supremacy began with Bimbisara. The statement in the Mahavamsa that he was anointed king by his father at the age of 15 suggests that he was not the founder of his dynasty. There is a view that the title Seniya (or Shrenika) given to him in Buddhist texts indicates that he was initially a senapati (commander-in-chief), probably of the Vajjis. However the Mahavamsa reference does not support such an inference. According to Ashvaghosha’s Buddhacharita, Bimbisara belonged to the Haryanka kula (family). The Mahavagga, a Buddhist text, speaks of Bimbisara’s 500 wives. We know that he made a number of matrimonial alliances that helped strengthen Magadha’s position. He married Mahakosala, sister of king Prasenajit of Kosala. This marriage brought him a village in Kashi as dowry. He also married a Videhan princess and Khema, daughter of the Madra ruler of central Punjab. Bimbisara’s first capital was at Girivraja (identified with Rajagriha). He led a military campaign against Anga, perhaps to avenge his father’s earlier defeat at the hands of its king, Brahmadatta. The campaign was successful, Anga was annexed, and prince Kunika (Ajatashatru) was appointed governor at Champa. A story of Bimbisara sending his physician Jivaka to attend to Pradyota, king of Avanti, in a time of illness suggests cordial relations between the two. FURTHER DISCUSSION The chronology of the early dynasties of Magadha It is difficult to identify precise dates for the rule of the early dynasties and kings. The following rough chronology can be given for the Haryanka, Shaishunaga, and Nanda dynasties: Bimbisara 545–493 BCE Ajatashatru 493–462 BCE The next four Haryanka kings 462–430/413 BCE Shishunaga and his successors 430/413–364 BCE The Nandas 364/345–324 BCE The calculation of dates for these dynasties involves working out the approximate number of regnal years for various kings and arranging the dynastic details in relation to the date assigned to the Buddha’s demise. Buddhist tradition asserts that the Buddha died in the 8th year of Ajatashatru’s reign. However, as mentioned earlier, there is a lack of consensus among scholars about the Buddha’s dates. The chronology of the Haryanka, Shaishunaga, and Nanda dynasties given above is based on the assumption that the Buddha died in or around 486 BCE. If the date of the parinibbana is to be brought forward to between 378 BCE and 348 BCE, all these other dates would have to be pushed forward as well. However, there is at present no need to abandon the older chronology, as a plausible dynastic sequence can be constructed on its basis. The Mahavagga suggests that Bimbisara had a very large kingdom consisting of thousands of prosperous villages. Buddhist texts refer to villages governed by assemblies under village headmen (gramakas). They also talk of high-ranking officials known as mahamatras, who probably had executive, judicial, and military functions. Bimbisara’s retinue is said to have included a person named Sona Kolivisa; a flower gatherer named Sumana, who provided the king with jasmine flowers every day; a minister named Koliya; a treasurer Kumbhaghosaka; and the physician Jivaka. The king’s title ‘Seniya’ can be taken as indicative that he recruited a standing army maintained on a regular basis through state revenues, and did not rely exclusively on mercenaries. Jaina texts claim Bimbisara was a follower of Mahavira. According to the Uttaradhyayana Sutra, he visited Mahavira along with a retinue of wives, relatives, and servants and became a devoted follower. Buddhist texts, on the other hand, claim that he was a follower of the Buddha. According to the Sutta Nipata, Bimbisara first met Gautama about seven years before the latter’s enlightenment. The second meeting is described as having taken place at Rajagriha, when the Buddha visited the Magadhan capital with a large group of his disciples. Bimbisara is supposed to have embraced his teaching, hosted meals for the monks at the palace, and gifed a park called Veluvana to the sangha. On another occasion, Bimbisara is supposed to have deputed Jivaka to attend to the Buddha and other monks. The king’s wife, Khema, is described as well versed in the Buddha’s teaching. Several rules in the Vinaya Pitaka—for instance, those dealing with monks eating fruits, the observance of the monsoon retreat, and soldiers joining the army—are stated to have been promulgated by the Buddha in response to issues raised by Bimbisara. After an incident wherein the Buddha did not have money to pay a ferryman who took him across the Ganga, the king is said to have announced a remission of ferry charges for all ascetics. It is impossible to say whether there is any historical basis for such stories; what they do indicate is that Bimbisara was considered an important figure in the early Buddhist tradition. According to Buddhist tradition, Bimbisara was killed by his son Kunika, also known as Ajatashatru, at the instance of the Buddha’s wicked cousin Devadatta. Ajatashatru is said to have later confessed his crime to the Buddha. Jaina tradition, on the other hand, states that Ajatashatru imprisoned his father in order to become king. Queen Chellana displayed such devotion towards her husband in prison that Ajatashatru was filled with remorse for what he had done, and rushed forward with an iron club to break his father’s chains. Thinking that his son was advancing to kill him, Bimbisara is said to have consumed poison and ended his own life. The steady expansion of Magadha continued under Ajatashatru. The conflict with Kosala was an important part of this process. Prasenajit, king of Kosala, was furious at Ajatashatru’s patricide. His anger was compounded by the fact that Mahakoshala, one of Bimbisara’s wives and Prasenajit’s sister, died of grief soon thereafter. Prasenajit rescinded the gift of Kashi village that had been part of his sister’s dowry. This was followed by a war between Kosala and Magadha. On one occasion, Prasenajit was defeated and had to flee to his capital. On another, Ajatashatru was captured, but his life spared. According to the terms of the peace that was eventually concluded, Kashi was returned to Ajatashatru, and he also received a Kosalan princess named Vajira in marriage. Prasenajit himself was soon thereafter deposed in a palace coup. He set out towards Rajagriha to seek Ajatashatru’s help, but died outside the city gates. A major success for Ajatashatru was his victory over the Lichchhavis. According to Buddhist tradition, the conflict was instigated by the Lichchhavis, who broke their promise to share equally with Ajatashatru the contents of a jewel mine that was discovered at the foot of a hill at a port on the Ganga. According to Jaina tradition, the conflict started when the young princes Halla and Vehalla refused to hand over to their stepbrother Ajatashatru a very special elephant named Seyanaga (‘Sprinkler’, because he had a habit of sprinkling water on women of the court with his trunk) and a very valuable necklace consisting of 18 strings of pearls that their father Bimbisara had given them. The princes ran off to their maternal grandfather in Vaishali along with the two precious items, and this is supposed to have led to the conflict. It seems that the Lichchhavis were supported by various other ganas, and also by Kosala. The Lichchhavis were at the height of their power at the time. Ajatashatru realized that he would not be able to defeat them in direct combat. So he sent his minister Vassakara on an undercover mission to slowly but surely create dissension within their ranks. The strategy succeeded. According to Buddhist tradition, when Ajatashatru finally attacked, the Lichchhavis were so busy quarrelling among themselves about how they should conduct their defence that Ajatashatru was able to defeat them. Jaina texts state that Ajatashatru used two unique weapons in the war—one was a catapult capable of hurling huge pieces of stone, and the other a chariot with an attached mace, which created havoc in enemy ranks. To conduct the operations against the Lichchhavis more effectively, Ajatashatru ordered fortifications constructed at Pataligrama on the Ganga. This later became the famous metropolis of Pataliputra. The conflict between Ajatashatru and the Lichchhavis was a protracted one and may have lasted at least between 484 and 468 BCE. Ultimately, victory went to Magadha. Ajatashatru also defeated Chanda Pradyota of Avanti. Ajatashatru’s visit to the Buddha Royal patronage was an important source of prestige for ancient religious sects. Ajatashatru’s visit to the Buddha was considered an important event in the Buddhist tradition. It is depicted in a 2nd century BCE relief panel on one of the railing pillars of the western gateway that originally stood at the central Indian Buddhist site of Bharhut. The first part of the scene is carved on the lower left side of the panel. It shows a royal procession, headed by a king riding an elephant, followed by his queens, also on elephants. To the right, the king has dismounted from the elephant and stands before two mango trees with his right hand raised, as if to speak. In the third scene, which is on the rear left, the king and queens stand with hands folded reverentially. In the last scene, on the top right, the king performs obeisance before the footprint-bearing throne symbolizing the Buddha. We know that this scene represents Ajatashatru’s visit to the Buddha because a Prakrit inscription on the side reads: Ajatasatu Bhagavato vandate (Ajatashatru worships the Lord [Buddha]). As is the case with Bimbisara, Ajatashatru too is presented as a follower of Mahavira in the Jaina tradition and of the Buddha in the Buddhist. Jaina texts describe the king’s frequent visits to Mahavira, his conversations with him at Vaishali and Champa, and his strong adherance to Mahavira’s teaching. Buddhist texts describe Ajatashatru as approaching the Buddha to express remorse for his patricide. On the Buddha’s demise, Ajatashatru is said to have gone to Kusinara to claim a portion of his relics on the grounds that he, like the Buddha, was a Kshatriya. He is also credited with building many relic stupas around Rajagriha and repairing many monasteries in and around the city. Buddhist tradition describes repairing many monasteries in and around the city. Buddhist tradition describes him as hosting the first Buddhist council at Rajagriha. This important event, which saw a grand assembly of eminent monks, took place soon after the Buddha’s death. Buddhist tradition describes the four kings who succeeded Ajatashatru as patricides who ruled for a total of 56 years. Buddhist texts refer to the immediate successor as Udayibhadda, Jaina texts as Udayabhadra or Udayin. The Puranas insert a ruler named Darshaka before him. Far from depicting Udayin as a patricide, Jaina tradition describes him as a devoted son, who served as his father’s viceroy at Champa before being elevated to kingship, later founding the city of Pataliputra. He is described as a devout Jaina, given to frequent fasting. In fact he is said to have been killed by an assassin hired by the king of Avanti, while piously listening to a religious discourse. According to the Puranas, Udayin was succeeded by Nandivardhana and Mahanandin. Buddhist tradition, on the other hand, lists Anuruddha, Munda, and Nagadarshaka as Udayibhadda’s successors. We are told that the people of Magadha drove out the ruling family and elected an amatya (a high-ranking official) named Shishunaga as king. Shishunaga seems to have had a second capital at Vaishali (according to the Mahavamsatika, he was the son of a Lichchhavi raja of Vaishali). He succeeded in destroying the power of the Pradyota dynasty of Avanti. The kingdoms of Vatsa and Kosala may also have been annexed by him. Kalashoka (probably the Kakavarna of the Puranas) was Shishunaga’s son and successor. His reign saw the shifting of the capital to Pataliputra and the convening of the second Buddhist council at Vaishali. The Shaishunaga dynasty came to a bloody end. The king and his sons were murdered, making way for the Nanda dynasty. The Puranas call the founder of the Nanda dynasty Mahapadma, while Buddhist tradition calls him Ugrasena. The Jaina Parishishtaparvan states that the first Nanda king was the son of a barber by a ganika (courtesan). The Greek writer Curtius tells us that he was a barber who became a lover of one of the queens and killed the king at her instigation. The Puranas describe Mahapadma as the son of a king of the Shaishunaga dynasty by a Shudra woman, and express their disapproval by describing the Nanda kings as adharmika (those who do not follow the norms of dharma). Buddhist texts describe the Nandas as ‘of unknown lineage’ (annatakula). According to the Mahavamsatika, Ugrasena was a man of the frontier who fell into the clutches of a gang of robbers, became their leader, and led them to many military successes. Puranic, Buddhist, and Jaina traditions agree that there were nine Nanda kings. However, the Puranas describe the first king as the father and the later eight as his sons, while Buddhist texts describe all eight as brothers. The Puranas name only Mahapadma and one of his sons, Sukalpa. The Mahabodhivamsa gives the following list of nine kings: Ugrasena, Panduka, Pandugati, Bhutapala, Rashtrapala, Govishanaka, Dashasiddhaka, Kaivarta, and Dhana. The Puranas refer to Mahapadma as one who attained sole sovereignty (ekarat) and as an uprooter of the Kshatriyas (sarva-kshatrantaka). A possible indication of Nanda military victories in Kalinga is suggested by the later Hathigumpha inscription of Kharavela, which mentions a king named Nanda building a canal and either conquering a place or taking away a Jaina shrine or image from Kalinga. The existence of a place called Nau Nand Dehra (Nanded) on the Godavari is taken by some scholars as reflecting Nanda rule over the Deccan. The evidence for the extension of Nanda rule into trans-Vindhyan India is not, however, strong. Dhana Nanda was ruling Magadha at the time of Alexander’s invasion. The Greek accounts call him Agrammes or Xandrames (probably a corruption of Augrasenya, son of Ugrasena). He is described as a powerful king who ruled over the Prasii (Prachya, i.e., the eastern people) and the Gangaridae (the people of the lower Ganga valley). Curtius states that he had an army consisting of 20,000 cavalry, 200,000 infantry, 2,000 chariots, and 3,000 elephants. Other Greek accounts give the number of elephants as 4,000 or 6,000. Although these figures cannot be taken as precise statistics, they do suggest that the Greeks had heard reports of the large and formidable army maintained by the Nandas. Later indigenous sources refer to the fabulous riches of Dhana Nanda, his greed, his exploitation of his people, and his consequent unpopularity. According to Jaina tradition, the Nandas had several ministers with Jaina leanings. Kalpaka was a minister of the first Nanda king. He is said to have been reluctant to assume office, but once he took on the post, encouraged the king towards an aggressive expansionist policy. Jaina texts suggest that ministerial office was hereditary. They state that on the death of Shakatala, a minister of the ninth Nanda king, the position was offered to his son Sthulabhadra, who refused it and became a Jaina monk. The post was then accepted by Sthulabhadra’s it and became a Jaina monk. The post was then accepted by Sthulabhadra’s brother, Shriyaka. The Nanda kings built on the foundations laid by their Haryanka and Shaishunaga predecessors to create the first great empire of north India. Much has been written about the factors that led to Magadha’s political success. Its geographical position was certainly favourable. The old capital Rajagriha was surrounded by a perimeter of five easily defended hills and the new capital Pataliputra was protected due to its location at the junction of the Ganga and Son. Moreover, the Ganga and its tributaries—the Son on the south and the Gandak and Gogra on the north—connected this kingdom with the important trade routes. Some historians have mentioned Magadha’s comparative freedom from Brahmanical orthodoxy as an asset, but it is difficult to assess the political impact of such a factor. Kosambi (, 1998: 155) suggested that a monopoly over iron ore mines was a major factor responsible for Magadha’s imperialist expansion. As pointed out in Chapter 5, Magadha did not in fact have a monopoly of iron ores, and the exploitation of the ores of south Bihar seem to have started much later. In terms of resources, the kingdom did have advantages of fertile soil and access to timber and elephants in the adjoining forests. The nearby Chotanagpur plateau was rich in many kinds of minerals and raw materials, and access to these must also have been an important asset. Resourceful rulers who launched and led successful military campaigns and devised strategic matrimonial alliances played a crucial role in the process of empire building. Ultimately, the basis of Magadha’s military success over the centuries was based on effective extraction and deployment of resources by the state and the creation of a strong military force on this foundation. Unfortunately, we do not have details of the administrative, revenue, or military organization of the early Magadhan dynasties. The Persian and Macedonian Invasions In the 6th century BCE, the Persian empire extended upto the north-western borders of the subcontinent. The Achaemenid king Kurush or Cyrus (558–529 BCE) led a military expedition which destroyed the city of Kapisha, which lay to the south-east of the Hindu Kush mountains. The Greek historian Herodotus tells us that ‘India’ (i.e., the Indus valley) was the twentieth and most prosperous satrapy (province) of the Persian empire, and reports that the tribute from this province amounted to 360 talents of gold dust, more than that from all other provinces put together. The Behistun inscription of Darayavaush or Darius I (522–486 BCE) mentions the people of Gadara (Gandhara), Harauvati (Arachosia, including south-eastern and probably also parts of north-eastern Afghanistan), and Maka (possibly the Makran coast of Iran and Baluchistan) among the subjects of the Persian empire. The Hamadan inscription refers to the Hidus (i.e., Hindus, inhabitants of the lower Indus valley). Darius’ inscriptions at Persepolis and Naqsh-i-Rustom include the Hidus and Gandharians among his subjects. This king is also said to have sent a fleet of ships under Scylax to sail down the Indus to explore the river upto the sea. Darius was succeeded by his son Khshayarsha or Xerxes (486–465 BCE), who maintained his hold on the provinces of Gadara and Hidu. His army is supposed to have included soldiers from Gandhara and ‘India’. There is reference to Xerxes destroying the sanctuary of the Daivas in a troublesome province of his empire; this may allude to goings-on in Gandhara. The Persian empire declined after Xerxes’ death, but the Gandharians and ‘Indians’ continue to be mentioned as subjects of the Persian empire under Artakhsasa or Artaxerxes II (405–359 BCE). The army of Darius III (336–330 BCE) included ‘Indian’ troops, perhaps mercenaries. Apart from its political aspect, the most apparent and direct Persian impact on India was the introduction of the Kharoshthi script, which was derived from Aramaic, the official script of the Persian empire. Some historians have suggested Persian influence on the Mauryas and on their administration and art, but this seems to have been greatly exaggerated. By the time of Alexander’s invasion (327–326 BCE), the Persian hold over their Indian provinces must have been nominal or non-existent. The Greek historians give a detailed, if idealized, account of Alexander’s Indian campaign. After decisively defeating the Persian army led by Darius, the Macedonian conqueror turned towards the eastern provinces of the erstwhile Persian empire. He established a series of outposts in Afghanistan before venturing further into the subcontinent. According to the Greeks, at that time, the northwest was peppered with a number of principalities. There was some especially long and bitter fighting, for instance, at the walled city of Astes, the stronghold of the Assakenoi, whose army was led by their late king’s mother. The Greek historians make a great deal of Alexander’s siege of the hill fort of Aornos, because of a tradition that even the god Herakles had been unable to take it. In 326 BCE, Alexander’s army crossed the Indus. Ambhi, the ruler of Taxila, extended support to the Greeks. Porus (Puru or Paurava), who ruled the area between the Jhelum and Chenab, offered resistance, but was overpowered. From the Jhelum, Alexander moved onwards and captured the area between the Chenab and Ravi. Movement beyond the Beas was prevented by the resistance of his own soldiers, who were weary after many years of fighting and yearned to go home. Alexander retreated to the Jhelum and began his journey towards the Indus delta, leaving the territories he had so recently conquered in the hands of Porus, Ambhi, and Abhisara. The areas lying to the west of the Punjab were entrusted to satraps (governors) and Macedonian garrisons. On the way back, there were military encounters with ganas such as the Malloi (Malavas), Oxydrakai (Kshudrakas), Sibae (Shibi), and Agalassoi. Alexander finally reached the Indus delta, from where he took the land route towards Babylon through Gedrosia. He died two years later. Alexander’s invasion is generally seen as having briefly grazed the north- western rim of the subcontinent, not leading to any major or long-term impact. One of its results, however, was the creation of a Seleucid principality in the northwest and the establishment in the area of several Greek settlements including Boukephala, Nikaia, and several Alexandrias. Recent reassessments of Alexander’s invasion have critically examined both the Alexander legend as well as the historiography of the invasion (Ray and Potts, 2007). It has also been pointed out (Ray, 2003: 166–67) that the Greek presence in and around the Indian subcontinent needs to be considered within the context of wider trade and cultural interactions between India, the Persian Gulf, and the Mediterranean world. Such a perspective involves examining not only the classical accounts but also the evidence from archaeology, epigraphy, and numismatics. PRIMARY SOURCES The storming of the Malla citadel The Greek historians have left several vivid and detailed accounts of Alexander’s life and military career. Arrian’s Anabasis of Alexander, written in the 1st–2nd century CE, gives an account of Alexander’s life from his accession to his death. This includes a description of the Indian campaigns. Arrian states that he had derived his information from the writings of Aristobulus of Cassandreia, and Ptolemy, son of Lagus, who went on to become king of Egypt. Both these men had accompanied Alexander on his expeditions. Given below is Arrian’s description of the storming of the citadel of the Mallas: When the citadel was seen to be still in the possession of the army, and many of them were observed drawn up in front as if to repel attacks, some of the Macedonians tried to force an entry by undermining the wall, and others by placing scaling ladders against it, wherever it was practicable to do so. Alexander, thinking that the men who carried the ladders were too slow, snatched one from a man who was carrying it, placed it against the wall himself, and began to mount it, crouching under his shield. After him mounted Peucestas, the man who carried the sacred shield which Alexander took from the temple of the Trojan Athena and used to keep with him and have carried before him in all his battles. After Peucestas, by the same ladder ascended Leonnatus, the confidential bodyguard; and up another ladder went Abreas, one of the soldiers who received double pay for distinguished service. The king was now near the battlement of the wall, and leaning his shield against it, was pushing some of the Indians within the fort and had cleared that part of the wall by killing others with his sword. The shield-bearing guards, becoming very anxious for the king’s safety, pushed each other with ardour up the same ladder and broke it; so that those who were already mounted fell down and made the ascent impossible for the rest. Alexander then, standing upon the wall, was being attacked from all around from the adjacent towers; for none of the Indians dared approach him. He was also being attacked by the men in the city, who were throwing darts at him from no great distance; for a mound of earth happened to have been heaped up there opposite the wall. Alexander was conspicuous both by the brilliance of his weapons and by his extraordinary display of audacity. He perceived that his weapons and by his extraordinary display of audacity. He perceived that if he remained where he was, he would be incurring danger without being able to perform anything at all worthy of consideration. But if he leapt down within the fort, he might perhaps by this very act strike the Indians with terror, and if he did not, but should only thereby be incurring danger, at any rate he would die not ignobly after performing great deeds of valour worth hearing about by men of later times. Forming this resolution, he leapt down from the wall into the citadel.... SOURCE E. I. Robson cited in R. C. Majumdar , 1981: 68–69 Land and Agrarian Expansion Literary testimony and evidence from early NBPW sites reflect an expansion in the number and size of village settlements and a process of population growth in the Ganga valley during c. 600–300 BCE. For instance, Makkhan Lal’s (1984) study of the Kanpur district lists 99 NBPW sites, compared to 46 PGW and 9 BRW ones. Early Buddhist texts mention different kinds of rural settlements (Wagle, 1966: 13–16). The Vinaya Pitaka suggests that one, two, three, or four kutis, could form a village. Kuti probably meant a hamlet consisting of a large house and smaller houses around it. The word gama (Pali for grama) could refer to a hamlet, village, part of a settlement, temporary settlement, or even a caravan of traders camping in one place for over four months. Pali texts refer to gamas of park attendants (aramika-gama), carpenters (vaddhaki-gama), reed makers (nalakara-gama), and salt makers (lonakara-gama). People following these professions may have constituted a majority in such villages. Gamas of Brahmanas and of Chandalas are also mentioned. Terms such as gama-gamani and gamika refer to village headmen and overseers. The basis of the agricultural economy of the various regions had been laid down in the preceding centuries. The importance of agriculture in the Ganga valley is reflected in the many agricultural similes used in Buddhist texts. Several Vinaya rules are described as having been made in response to the needs of farmers. For instance, the rule that monks were to stay in one place during the monsoon is said to have been made because farmers complained to the Buddha that monks were walking through their fields during the rains and destroying seedlings. People also practised animal rearing, especially cattle rearing. But land had clearly emerged as the most important basis and form of wealth. The emergence of urban centres suggests increasing yields and agricultural surplus. Rice cultivation continued to be an important aspect of agriculture in the Ganga valley. As mentioned in Chapter 5, the assessment of the role of iron in agricultural expansion, the generation of an agricultural surplus, and the emergence of urban centres has been debated for long by historians and archaeologists. Iron technology was one of several agents of historical change in the 1st millennium BCE. Iron was certainly being used in agriculture in the Ganga valley by this time. Compared to the preceding PGW phase, there is a marked increase in the number and range of iron artefacts at NBPW levels. The size of landholdings varied. Small farmers must have used household labour to till their modest plots of land. On the other hand, there were owners of large landed estates. For instance, the Brahmana Kasibharadvaja of Ekanala village is described as employing 500 ploughs on his land. There are references to Brahmana gamas in Magadha and Kosala, where Brahmanas were the dominant landowners. Some of these villages may have originally been brahmadeyas (land gifted by kings to Brahmanas). The only place where the Buddha is described (in the Samyutta Nikaya) as having been refused food on his begging rounds is in the Brahmana gama of Panchasala. The emergence of the idea of private property in land is evident from references to the gift and sale of land. For example, Anathapindika, a wealthy gahapati of Shravasti, bought Jetavana from prince Jeta Kumara in order to gift it to the sangha. Land gifted to the sangha was generally orchard land or wooded land. The Vinaya Pitaka defines an arama (land gifted to the sangha) as a flower garden (puppharamo) or orchard (phalaramo). The Anguttara Nikaya in fact explicitly prohibits the sangha from possessing agricultural land. It is interesting to note that the Agganna Sutta in the Digha Nikaya connects the origin of kingship to disputes arising over rice fields. References in the Digha and Majjhima Nikayas to Bimbisara and Pasenadi giving land to Brahmanas and the sangha indicate that kings had control over some tracts of land. Wastelands, forests, and mines probably also fell within their purview. From the point of view of the state, land was the most important source of revenue. Taxes on land must have varied a great deal. The Dharmashastra texts generally stipulate 1/6th of the subjects’ produce as the king’s share. However, the Gautama Dharmasutra (10.24) states that cultivators must pay the king a tax amounting to 1/10th, 1/8th, or 1/6th of their produce. Buddhist texts refer to dasas, dasis, kammakaras, and porisas working in households and on land. The words dasa and dasi for male and female slaves are known in earlier sources. But kammakara is new and refers to someone who hired out his labour in return for wages. Household labour was no doubt inadequate for owners of large landholdings, and herein lies the origin of the practice of employing wage labour. The compound word dasa-kammakara is also sometimes used for labourers. The Ashtadhyayi refers to vetan (wage) and vaitanika (wage earner). From Village to Town: The Example of Atranjikhera Excavations at Atranjikhera (Etah district, UP) on the banks of the Kali Nadi, a tributary of the Ganga, have provided valuable information on the transition from village to town and the everyday life of the people living here (Gaur, 1983). This site showed an overlap between the PGW phase (Period III) and the succeeding NBPW phase (Period IV). The excavators divided the 5 m thick NBPW deposit into four phases. On the basis of C-14 dates, the thickness of the deposits, and analogies with other NBPW sites, these phases were dated as follows: Period IVA — c. 600–500 BCE; Period IVB — c. 500–350 BCE; Period IVC — c. 350–200 BCE; and Period IVD — c. 200–50 BCE. Here, we will look closely at the first two sub-periods— IVA and IVB. PGW sherds gradually decreased and NBPW sherds increased in the early part of Period IV. The NBPW at Atranjikhera displays the general features associated with this pottery type only on the outside; the inner surface of the pots is a fine grey. Some kind of liquid, perhaps an iron-rich emulsion, was applied to the outer surface. The NBPW of Period IVB showed greater variety in shapes and a better finish. The pots were in different shades of grey, brown, and black, some with a silver or golden tinge. Other pottery types associated with the NBPW included red ware, black-slipped ware, and grey ware. The size of the settlement increased significantly, showing distinct signs of the beginning of urbanization. There was a gradual transition from mud houses to structures made of mud-brick and burnt brick. The different levels of Phase IVA yielded remains of mud house floors, domestic hearths, cooking pots, oval fire pits, kuchcha drains, and two sections of mud walls. Iron slag, two arrowheads, and one spearhead were found in one of the fire pits (4 × 23 cm), which might have been a smelting furnace. In Period IVB, there was evidence of flooding, which seems to have led people to build a high, wide mud bund to protect the settlement from similar incidents in the future. Other remains of Periods IVA and IVB included a well-rammed mud floor with post holes, a broken terracotta drain pipe, what seems to have been a kuchcha well, mud-brick walls belonging to a structure, and part of a structure described as a barn. The transition from mud to mud-brick and burnt brick, which began in the early NBPW phases, was more pronounced in later ones. The wide range of artifacts from Periods IVA and IVB included the earliest terracottas found at the site. These comprised human, human-like, and animal (mostly humped bull) figures, gamesmen, bangles, a skin rubber, stoppers (like corks), reels, pestles and querns, dabbers, and net sinkers. There were also toy or ritualistic pots, lots of balls (many with elaborate incised designs), and discs (many with impressed or incised notches around the circumference). Terracotta beads in new shapes and designs were found in large numbers. Two modelled terracotta blocks were found, which may have been used for printing designs onto fabrics. Two votive miniature tanks may have been part of the paraphernalia of household rituals. Beads of semi-precious stones such as agate and carnelian showed some continuity from the preceding PGW phase, but there were some new shapes as well. Stone objects such as a pestle, grinder, balls, and pieces of pots were discovered. There were lots of bone and ivory objects such as arrowheads, styluses, awls, sockets, pendants, beads, comb, bangles, gamesmen, and a bird figure. TABLE 6.1 IRON OBJECTS AT ATRANJIKHERA PERIOD IV (NBPW PHASE) Period IVA did not yield any coins. Towards the end of Period IVB, however, there were two coins—one silver punch-marked coin and one uninscribed copper coin. The obverse of the punch-marked coin had symbols such as the sun, a six- armed symbol, peacock-on-hill, and a steelyard (?), with a peacock-on-hill on the reverse. The copper coin had a small square with diagonals on the obverse, and a circle with four crescents around it on the reverse. A total of 38 copper objects were found from different phases of the NBPW level— 13 from Phase A, 21 from Phase B, 25 from Phase C, and 29 from Phase D. The copper artefacts found in the early phases included antimony rods, nail parer, rods/bars, pins, bangles, an ear ornament, bead, socket, weight, and tubes, apart from some indeterminate objects. A total of 338 iron objects, including 37 indeterminate pieces, were found in all the NBPW levels taken together (see Table 6.1). Most of the types of Period III continued, but there were 16 new artefact types. Agricultural tools made of iron appeared for the first time in the NBPW phase. Iron plumb bobs were used for the alignment of walls of buildings. Iron weapons suggest the importance of hunting or warfare. Blacksmiths’ and carpenters’ tools indicate the importance of these crafts. S. K. Chowdhury’s analysis (Gaur, 1983) of the plant remains found in the Atranjikhera excavations reveals some important details. The OCP and BRW phases yielded a few remains of rice, barley, gram, and khesari. The PGW level gave evidence of wheat, and the manner in which plant remains were scattered about and found in heaps suggested more abundant grain production than before. The NBPW phase showed the cultivation of rice, wheat, and barley, with the addition of a new pulse (Phaseolus mungo). The wood remains included laurel, farash, bamboo, deodar, and Himalayan cypress. As cedar and Himalayan cypress grow in the northern mountains, these finds suggest contact with these regions. Almost a thousand pieces of bone fragments from the site were analysed. Those belonging to the NBPW phase included bones of domesticated humped cattle, buffalo, goat, sheep, pig, and dog. Horse remains occurred in the PGW and post-PGW phases. Many animal bones were split or cut with sharp tools and charred—clear evidence that the animals were killed for food. The bones of cattle vastly outnumbered those of other animals, indicating that beef was an important part of the diet, apart from venison, mutton, and pork. Atranjikhera has been tentatively identified with the Vairanja or Veranja of early Buddhist texts, but this identification is far from certain. The Emergence of City Life In 6th century BCE north India, urban settlements with a distinct urban morphology and architecture were clearly emerging in the midst of teeming villages and surrounding forests. Chakrabarti (2006: 315) dates the beginning of this process earlier, to c. 800 BCE. As far as South India is concerned, the site of Kodumanal, which has yielded graffiti and Tamil–Brahmi writing on potsherds, is especially important. On the basis of a reassessment of the evidence, K. Rajan (personal communication) has suggested that the beginning of the early historical phase in Tamil Nadu should be placed in at least c. 400 BCE. According to Chakrabarti (2006: 345), the evidence emerging from Kodumanal indicates that the beginning of urbanization in Tamil Nadu goes back to c. 500 BCE. In this chapter, however, we will focus on north India Cities had different kinds of functions and identities, as centres of political control, craft production, or trade; some combined all these. The foundations of this urbanization—the second phase in the north—were laid in the earlier centuries, with the establishment of a firm agricultural base that ensured sustained food surpluses. Settlements grew in population, number, and size. Increasing craft specialization, trade, and the beginning of the use of money led to higher degress of social complexity. Political leadership lent an important element of central direction and control. The Pali canon refers to different kinds of urban settlements (Wagle, 1966: 23–29; Sarao , 2007). Pura meant a town or city, often associated with fortifications. Nagara was a fortress or town. Nigama refered to a market town, midway between a gama and nagara in terms of size and social complexity, and was frequently associated with commercial activities. Rajadhani was a capital city. Nagaraka was a small town, mahanagara a big city. Champa, Rajagriha, Shravasti, Saketa, Kaushambi, and Varanasi were mahanagaras. The texts often refer to the walls, gates, and watchtowers of cities and the hustle and bustle of urban life. FURTHER DISCUSSION Perceptions of the forest The expansion of agriculture and urbanization involved steady encroachment on forests and a constant interaction between nature and culture. Romila Thapar points to the complex relationship between grama (settlement) and aranya (forest) in ancient Indian texts. These reflect an increasing self- consciousness with regard to the forest and a gradual, but progressive, distancing from it. In the Vedas, grama and aranya are contrasts. The grama was orderly and known, the forest disorderly and unknown. The people who inhabited these spaces were also different, forest dwellers being described as wild and strange. As the process of urbanization got underway, forest people were increasingly portrayed as culturally and socially backward. In the Mahabharata and Ramayana, the forest is a place where the main protagonists spend many years in exile. This involved some amount of acknowledgement and empathy with the forest, but the distinction between grama and aranya was maintainted. The heroes and heroines in exile are different from the regular forest dwellers who hunt wild animals and subsist on fruits and roots. There are also dramatic episodes involving the destruction of the forest and its creatures. The Mahabharata gives a graphic description of Dushyanta’s hunt, which involved a massive destruction of trees and killing of animals. There is also a graphic description of the burning of the Khandava forest by Krishna and Arjuna, prior to the establishment of the Pandava capital, Indraprastha. Such incidents bear the unmistakeable stamp of the idea of a triumphant taming of the forest. Certain epic myths reflect contempt for the forest dweller. For instance, there is the story of Prithu, the first righteous king. His predecessor Vena turned out to be wicked, so the Brahmanas killed him by striking him with kusha grass. They churned his left thigh, and out of it emerged a short, dark man whom they called Nishada, whom they immediately dispatched to the forest. They then churned Vena’s right arm, and from it emerged a tall, fair, handsome king who became known as Prithu. The forest was also the abode of sages and ascetics, and certain Sanskrit texts painted a romanticized picture of life in the ashrama (hermitage). This can be seen, for instance, in Kalidasa’s Shakuntala, where the main female protagonist Shakuntala has an intimate, loving relationship with the forest’s flora and fauna. Encroachments on forests steadily increased, most dramtically so in modern times. But while the forest steadily disappeared, it left its indelible mark in various ways. The association of trees with spirits, deities, and saints is a recurrent feature of Indic religious traditions. Tree worship, often linked to fertillity cults, has remained an important element in popular religious practice over the centuries, in urban as well as rural milieux. SOURCE Thapar , 2007 Archaeological and Literary Profiles of Early Historical Cities There is much less archaeological data about early historical cities compared to the protohistoric Harappan ones. Many areas such as Kashmir, Punjab, Sindh, and the Northeastern states have not been adequately explored. Apart from a few sites such as Taxila and Bhita, there have been very few large-scale excavations. Many early historical urban sites were continuously occupied over many centuries. In some cases they are occupied even today, which makes it difficult to study their earliest levels. Published details of the smaller scale excavations are incomplete and inadequate, and few radiocarbon dates are available. Most archaeological reports do not distinguish between the early, middle, and late NBPW phases; they offer a consolidated picture of c. 700–100 BCE and give comparatively less information on the earlier phases within this time bracket. Although there is much that remains to be known about early historical urbanism, the new urban morphology is clear from textual as well as archaeological evidence. While many of the major cities mentioned in texts have been identified, some remain unidentified. It is interesting to note that archaeology confirms the importance of the great cities of literature. The details may not match, due to inadequate excavations, the lack of full published reports, and the embellishments of the literary tradition. Nevertheless, the profiles of early historical cities can be constructed by putting together the available literary and archaeological evidence (Dilip K. Chakrabarti, 2001: 171– 262; 2006: 322–48). These cities were linked to each other through the trade routes of the time. The city was not only a certain type of settlement. It was also a political, social, and economic space. Literature is often eloquent about these aspects, but the idea of the city in various texts is by no means uniform (Chattopadhyaya , 2003). The city meant different things to writers of different regions and ages. It was sometimes presented as an idealized structuring of space, corresponding to notions of a moral or social order, one in which the king was central. Other texts underlined the socially heterogeneous nature of cities, suggesting that they were considered ‘points of convergence’. It is possible to pluck out specific details about cities from texts of this period, but what these texts really do is paint in vivid, verbal colours what Chattopadhyaya describes as the ‘citiness of the city’. THE NORTH-WEST The two great cities of the northwest—Charsada and Taxila—were strategically located at points where the trade routes crossed the Hindu Kush. Apart from the Khyber pass, there were other routes, such as the one running along the Kabul valley. An important route linked Taxila to Kashmir, and further on, to central Asia. In the 5th century BCE, a part of the northwest came under the sway of the Achaemenids and was subsequently brushed past by Alexander. Charsada represents the ancient city of Pushkalavati. Legend describes it as having been founded by Pushkara, son of Bharata, the brother of Rama. It is mentioned as Peucelaotis and Proclais in classical accounts. Arrian states that the people of the city revolted against Alexander and that a Macedonian garrison was placed here after Hephaestion subdued the revolt. Excavations at the mound of Bala Hisar at Charsada indicate occupation beginning in c. 600 BCE. By the early 4th century BCE, the city was protected by a ditch and mud rampart. MAP 6.2 SOME EARLY HISTORICAL CITIES OF NORTH AND CENTRAL INDIA Ancient Takshashila (Taxila) was an important city, connected to the overland routes into Afghanistan and central Asia and to the maritime routes of the Arabian Sea via the Indus. According to epic tradition, this was the place where king Janamejaya performed his great naga-yajna (snake sacrifice). The city is also mentioned in Buddhist, Jaina, and Greek accounts. Extensive excavations at Taxila revealed three major settlements at the Bhir mound, Sirkap, and Sirsukh. The Bhir mound represents the site of the oldest city, with occupational levels belonging to the 6th/5th century BCE up to the 2nd century BCE. The earliest levels of this mound (Period IV) showed a burnished red ware, which is known in this region from an earlier period. There was also a new, fine grey or black ware in shapes such as shallow and deep bowls, which seem to be local imitations of the NBPW. Silver punch-marked bar coins and other coin types were found. Comparatively more information is available about the post-3rd century BCE levels at the Bhir mound. THE INDO-GANGETIC DIVIDE, THE UPPER GANGA VALLEY, AND THE DOAB In the Kumaon region of Uttarakhand, NBPW was found at Kashipur in Nainital district, but hardly any details are available. In the Indo-Gangetic divide, Period III at Ropar, at the foot of the Shivaliks, yielded NBPW and is dated c. 600–200 BCE. Pottery of this type has also been found at Agroha in Hissar district and at Karna-ka-Qila near Kurukshetra in Haryana. Excavations at the Purana Qila (associated in local tradition with Indraprastha of the Mahabharata) in Delhi revealed NBPW levels belonging to the 4th–3rd centuries BCE. People lived in houses of mud-brick and burnt brick. A burnt wattle-and-daub structure and several hearths were found. Houses had drains made of both rectangular and wedge-shaped bricks. Terracotta ring wells—about 75 cm in diameter—which may have functioned as soak-pits for waste water, were also discovered. Terracotta figurines of humans and animals, a fragment of a sculpted ring stone, a terracotta piece depicting a horse and armoured rider, a clay sealing, small rings, and an agate disc were among the other artefacts found at NBPW levels. One of the NBPW dishes had the figure of an elephant stamped on the inner side of its base. Two terracotta seals, bearing the names of two individuals, Svatirakhita and Seyankara, were also found. In the upper Ganga valley, Hastinapura in Meerut district is an important site for which there is a full, published report (Lal, 1954–55). In epic–Puranic tradition, the Kuru capital was located at Hastinapura until a flood led to its being shifted to Kaushambi. Jaina tradition describes Hastinapura as the place where Rishabha, the first tirthankara, lived and which Mahavira often visited. Period III at Hastinapura is the NBPW phase and is dated c. 600–200 BCE. It is marked by an element of planning, burnt-brick structures, and terracotta ring wells. Mathura was an important city of early historical India. The Mahabharata and the Puranas associate it with the Yadava clan, which included the Vrishnis, among whom Krishna was born. This city was situated at the entrance of the fertile Ganga plains, at the junction of the northern trade route and the one going southwards into Malwa, and on to the western coast. Period I of the Mathura cultural sequence has been identified at the Ambarish Tila, close to the Yamuna, north of Mathura city. It is marked by PGW and shows the gradual growth of a village settlement. At Sonkh, 25 km south-west of Mathura, Period I has PGW, along with a BRW and a coarse grey ware, and is dated c. 800–400 BCE. No structural remains were unearthed, but there were post-holes and a double ditch, which might have enclosed the settlement (Hartel, 1993). The site of Kampilya, capital of south Panchala, has been identified with Kampil in Farukhabad district (UP). Small-scale excavations here indicated occupation from the PGW phase onwards. Ahichchhatra in Bareilly district also has NBPW levels, but most of the details of structures relate to the post-2nd century BCE period. EXCAVATED SECTION SHOWING STRATA OF PERIODS II, III, IV WITH EMBEDDED JAR, HASTINAPURA POTTERY OF DIFFERENT PERIODS, HASTINAPURA EXCAVATED EASTERN FORTIFICATIONS, KAUSHAMBI The ruins at Ayodhya, described in the Ramayana as capital of Kosala in the time of Rama, cover a circuit of 4–5 km. Earlier excavations revealed an occupation beginning with the early NBPW phase. Apart from very fine NBPW in different shades, there was a grey ware with linear designs painted on in black. There were remains of houses made of mud or wattle and daub; no baked brick structures were found. Artefacts made of iron and copper were discovered. The recent 2002–03 excavations at the site revealed many artefacts belonging to the NBPW phase. Terracotta objects comprised broken votive tanks, weights, ear studs, discs, hopscotches, a wheel made on a disc, and a broken animal figurine. Other artefacts included a broken iron knife, glass beads, and a bone point. One of the most interesting objects was a button-shaped light-blue glass object (perhaps originally set in a ring) found in two pieces, with the legend shidhe inscribed on it in 3rd century BCE Brahmi letters. As mentioned earlier, calibrated radiocarbon dates from Period I suggest that the NBPW phase at this site may go back to as early as c. 1000 BCE. The city of Kaushambi was the capital of the kingdom of Vatsa and was also an important point on the trade routes connecting the Deccan, the Ganga valley, and the northwest. It has been identified with Kosam village. Excavations here associated Period I with PGW, Period II with BRW, and Period III with NBPW. It has been argued that the imposing defences at the site were built as early as 1025 BCE, but it is more likely that they belong to a later period, perhaps c. 600 BCE. Pali texts locate the Ghoshitarama monastery at Kaushambi. Monastic seals of a much later period, bearing the name ‘Ghoshitarama’, confirmed the identification of the city. Excavations at Sringaverapura in Allahabad district have indicated that the NBPW phase here goes back to c. 700 BCE. The excavations mainly concentrated on a tank complex belonging to the early centuries CE, and there is little information about the earlier occupational phases. The Ramayana mentions Sringaverapura as a place where the sage Rishyashringa had his hermitage, and where Rama crossed the Ganga during his journey into exile. THE MIDDLE AND LOWER GANGA VALLEY Rajghat, to the north-east of Benaras, is identified as the site of ancient Varanasi. This city was famed for its fine textiles and was an important point on the northern trade routes. The site shows a five-or six-fold cultural sequence. Period I has been dated c. 800–200 BCE and is divided into three sub-periods. The remains of Period IA included iron objects, BRW, and red-slipped and coarse gritty red wares. Period IB saw the beginning of NBPW. There were remains of burnt clay floors, and pits lined with terracotta rings. The settlement seems to have been surrounded by a rampart from the middle or early NBPW phase. The site of ancient Shravasti, capital of Kosala, has been identified with the ruins at Saheth and Maheth, on the boundary of Gonda and Bahreich districts (UP). This city too was an important point on the northern trade routes. Maheth represents the city and Saheth the site of the ancient monastery of Jetavana. According to Buddhist tradition, Jetavana was gifted by Anathapindika to the sangha. Ramparts around the site probably belong to the 3rd century BCE. The discoveries at the adjacent sites of Ganwaria and Piprahwa in Basti district (north UP), excavated by an Archaeological Survey of India team led by K. M. Srivastava, should settle the longstanding debate about the location of ancient Kapilavastu (Srivastava, 1996). A large number of sealings and a pot lid bearing the name of the Kapilavastu monastery were found in excavations at Piprahwa. Apart from the ruins of monasteries and shrines, remains of what may represent the original stupa built by the Sakyas over the relics of the Buddha have also been identified. Ganwaria represents the town of Kapilavastu. The 7 m thick occupational deposit was divided into four periods—Period I (c. 800–600 BCE) is marked by fine grey, black polished, and red wares, Period II (c. 600–200 BCE) by the NBPW, and Periods III and IV range from c. 200 BCE to 200 CE. The people of Period I lived in mud houses with roofs supported by wood. Burnt-brick structures appeared in Period II. The remains at the nearby site of Tilaurakot in the Nepal terai were long held to represent ancient Kapilavastu. Period I here yielded NBPW and terracotta ring wells. SHRAVASTI: EXCAVATED MONASTERIES; MOUND The ruins in and around the village of Basarh in Muzaffarpur district of Bihar have been identified with ancient Vaishali, capital of the Lichchhavis and the Vajji confederacy. Vaishali lay along the route from Magadha into the Nepal terai. Buddhist texts have a great deal to say about this city, Jaina tradition describes it as the birthplace of Mahavira, and Puranic tradition connects it with a legendary king named Visala. The mound known as Raja Visal ka Garh shows traces of old fortifications, and a tank known as Khorana Pokhar may represent the coronation tank of the Lichchhavis. Many antiquities and structural remains were found here, some of which may go back to the 5th/4th century BCE. A mud stupa, later encased in brick, was located to the northwest of the tank. It is possible that its mud core represents the stupa built by the Lichchhavis over the Buddha’s relics. Rajgir, about 40 miles south-east of Patna, is the site of ancient Rajagriha, the first capital of Magadha. An important trade route from Paithan to the middle Ganga valley terminated here. The city was closely associated with the lives of both the Buddha and Mahavira. Archaeological explorations at Rajgir mainly concentrated on identifying places mentioned in Buddhist texts and Xuanzang’s account. There are two cities here—Old Rajagriha and New Rajagriha. Old Rajagriha, nestled between five hills, was surrounded by two stone fortification walls. New Rajagriha, also surrounded by stone fortifications, lay in the plain to the north. The massive Old Rajagriha outer fortifications ran through the hills, perhaps for 25–30 miles. They have not been dated, but literary sources suggest that they may date to the time of Bimbisara, i.e., the 6th century BCE. The two sets of walls around New Rajagriha probably belong to the time of Ajatashatru, i.e., the 5th century BCE. In the Vinaya Pitaka, the Buddha prophecies the future greatness of Pataliputra and the dangers posed to it by fire, water, and internal discord. The discovery of NBPW at Kumrahar and Bulandibagh in Patna suggests the existence of an early historical settlement in the area, one that can be identified with ancient Pataliputra. But hardly anything is known about the earliest occupation at this site. Ancient Champa, capital of Anga, has been identified with Champanagar and Champapur villages, 5 km west of Bhagalpur in south Bihar. In the NBPW phase, the site was surrounded by defensive fortifications, surrounded by a moat. PIPRAHWA: EXCAVATIONS IN PROGRESS There are a number of important sites in the lower Ganga valley such as Chandra-ketugarh and Tamluk. However, there is little information about their earliest phase of occupation. NBPW levels at Wari Bateshwar have given a calibrated C-14 date of c. 500 BCE. The antiquity of Mahasthangarh may also go back to this period. This suggests that the NBPW in Bengal dates back to the period of the mahajanapadas (Chakrabarti, 2006: 324). Apart from the literary and archaeological profiles of individual sites, important information is provided by settlement studies of certain areas. Erdosy’s study (1988) of the Allahabad district (UP) corresponds to an area that would have fallen within the Vatsa kingdom. Erdosy initially dated Period II of the archaeological sequence here to c. 600–350 BCE. Subsequently, he went on to distinguish between an early and a late NBPW phase, and taking into account the available C-14 dates, suggested that the early NBPW phase be dated c. 550–400 BCE and the mid-and late NBPW phase c. 400–100 BCE. In the early NBPW phase, there was a great increase in the size of settlements, suggesting a corresponding increase in population. A four-level hierarchy of settlements was identified. Kaushambi (capital of Vatsa) was already the largest settlement in the area in the PGW phase. In the early NBPW phase, it grew to 50 ha and was surrounded by a mud fortification wall. The second tier of NBPW settlements in the area includes Kara and Sringaverapura, both 12 ha. These were towns associated with various sorts of manufacturing activity. Two sites represent the third level of settlements, around 6–7 ha. These were relatively small settlements, with evidence of some craft activity and iron smelting. The fourth and smallest tier of sites was represented by 16 sites between 0.42 and 2 ha. These were villages of farmers and herders. Over the next few centuries, a fifth hierarchy of settlements (3–5 ha) emerged. There was an increase in the number of large, secondary centres, such as Bhita (19 ha) and Jhusi (over 30 ha). The general long-term trend was towards an increase in the number of village settlements, which were no longer concentrated along water resources such as riverbanks and lakes. S. B. Singh’s study (1979) of the Panchala area in the upper Ganga valley reveals a fourtier settlement structure, but does not distinguish between the early, middle, and late NBPW phases. Ahichchhatra, capital of Panchala, was the largest site. By the 3rd century BCE, it was a huge fortified city, measuring about 180 ha. Atranjikhera was a fortified secondary centre, about 64 ha in size, with evidence of a diverse agriculture base, craft activity, and trade. Jakhera was 8 ha, while the rest of the sites were villages less than 4 ha. The Kanpur district (UP) presents a different pattern. Makkhan Lal’s study (1984: 66–80) shows a significantly higher number of NBPW sites (99) compared to those of the preceding PGW phase (46). There was a two-level site hierarchy here and no really huge sites. The largest site measured 8.75 ha, and 98 sites were between 0.5 and 5 ha. The mean settlement size went up marginally, from 1.16 ha (PGW phase) to 1.41 ha (NBPW phase). Using modern settlement data and average household size, Lal gave the following population estimates for the entire Ganga–Yamuna doab: OCP phase— 52,000; PGW phase —16,300; NBPW phase—426,000; and 2nd century BCE–2nd century CE— 900,000. The general picture generated by archaeology is one of rural stability and steady population growth. STEATITE RELIC CASKET WITH BRAHMI INSCRIPTION POTTERY OF DIFFERENT PERIODS, AHICHCHHATRA CENTRAL INDIA AND THE DECCAN Although north India is the prime focus of this chapter, reference may also be made here to the evidence of urban developments in some other areas during c. 600–300 BCE. In central India, the ancient cities of Tripuri in the Narmada valley near Jabalpur and Airakina (Eran) near Sagar were probably part of the Chedi kingdom. The occupation of Tripuri goes back to the 2nd millennium BCE, but it is not clear exactly when it assumed an urban status. The settlement at Eran too goes back to the 2nd millennium BCE; it seems to have become a city by the Maurya period. Ujjayini (modern Ujjain), on the banks of the Sipra river, a tributary of the Chambal, was the capital of Avanti. It was also a major commercial centre, a point from where routes from northern India bifurcated southwards and westwards. Four occupational phases have been identified at the site. Period I had BRW and a few PGW sherds, and is dated c. 750–500 BCE. Other artefacts included terracotta spindle whorls, bone styli and arrowheads, spearheads, crowbars, spades, choppers, and knives made of iron. The settlement was surrounded by an imposing mud fortification wall, outside which was a moat. In Period II, the pottery included black-slipped ware, BRW, and NBPW. There were structures made of mud, mud-brick, stone rubble in clay, and burnt brick. There was a massive burnt-brick tank for water storage, and several terracotta ring wells. The remains of an iron-smelting furnace and a workshop for the manufacture of stone beads and bone arrowheads were identified. The artefacts of Period II included punch-marked coins, large numbers of iron objects, as well as objects made of terracotta, copper, and ivory. The remains of ancient Vidisha are located at Besnagar in Raisen district of Madhya Pradesh. This was an important point on the trade routes that traversed the Malwa region. Although the rampart at this site seems to have been built in the 2nd century BCE, the early NBPW phase shows BRW, iron objects, punch- marked coins, and ring wells. In the Deccan, the kingdom of Ashmaka on the Godavari was one of the 16 mahajanapadas. Paithan (ancient Pratishthana), one of the most important early historical sites in this area, has not yet been properly explored. The beginning of the early historical occupation at Nasik goes back to c. 400 BCE. The mud core of a stupa found at Pauni in the Wainganga valley also appears to belong to this period. Tagara, an important market town, is identified with Ter on the Terna river. Period I here has NBPW. Adam in Nagpur district has given evidence of a 10 ha site with an earthen rampart with gateways on the east. The rampart and associated moat belong to Period III, dated c. 1000–500 BCE. The former was subsequently reinforced by a stone battlement. The site of Nagal is located on the south bank of the Narmada, opposite the more famous but less explored site of Broach (ancient Bharukachchha). It yielded evidence of a settlement that may go back to at least the 6th century BCE. The remains included pottery, and bone and iron artefacts. SECTION SHOWING EXCAVATED BRICK STRUCTURES OF DIFFERENT PERIODS, UJJAIN Urban Occupations, Crafts, Guilds, and Money Early Buddhist texts mention a wide range of occupations (sippa, kamma), both rural and urban (Wagle, 1966: 134–58). Apart from farmers, cattle rearers, and traders, those employed in the service industry included washermen, barbers, tailors, painters, and cooks. The king employed many different kinds of specialists, including soldiers (yodhajivas) of various kinds—foot soldiers, archers, members of the cavalry, elephant corps, and chariot wing. Others in the king’s service (rajaporisas) included ministers (mahamachchas), governors (ratthikas), estate managers (pettanikas), the royal chamberlain (thapati), elephant trainers (hattirohas), policemen (rajabhatas), jailors (bandhanagarikas), slaves (dasas and dasis), and wage-workers (kammakaras). Urban occupations included those of the physician (vejja, bhisakka), surgeon (sallakata), and scribe (lekha). Accounting (ganana) and money changing were other urban professions. Types of entertainers include the actor (nata), dancer (nataka), magician (sokajjayika), acrobat (langhika), drummer (kumbhathunika), and woman fortune-teller (ikkhanika). Some of them performed in fairs known as samajas, apart from other occasions. There are also references to the accomplished courtesan (ganika) and the ordinary prostitute (vesi). The Pali canon refers to many different kinds of artisans, some of whom must have lived and worked in or near cities, supplying goods for an urban clientele. These included the vehicle maker (yanakara), ivory worker (dantakara), metal smith (kammara), goldsmith (suvannakara), silk weaver (kosiyakara), carpenter (palaganda), needle maker (suchikara), reed worker (nalakara), garland maker (malakara), and potter (kumbhakara). Some craft specialists may have lived in their own settlements on the margins of cities. The later evidence of the Jatakas more clearly indicates the localization of certain industries, the association of villages with specific artisan groups, and the hereditary nature of crafts. These processes must already have been underway in c. 600–300 BCE. The Gautama Dharmasutra mentions agriculture, trade, cattle rearing, and lending money on interest as occupations of the Vaishyas. It also states that farmers, traders, herdsmen, money-lenders, and artisans had the authority to lay down rules for their respective professions, and that the king should make legal decisions after listening to those who had authority within these professions. This suggests an element of corporate organization. Buddhist texts offer more direct evidence of the emergence of guilds. Terms such as shreni, nigama, puga, vrata, and sangha are used in ancient Indian texts to refer to various kinds of corporate organizations, including guilds. The Vinaya Pitaka mentions the guilds (puga) of Shravasti providing a regular supply of food for monks and nuns. More details about guild organization and activities are available in the Jatakas, which list 18 guilds and suggest the close association of heads of guilds with kings. An important aspect of urbanism was the emergence of coinage. Pali texts contain the first definite references to coins, e.g., kahapana, nikkha, kamsa, pada, masaka, and kakanika. The literary evidence is corroborated by archaeological evidence of punch-marked coins from many sites, most of them made of silver. The beginning of money did not mean the end of barter, but it did mark a qualitative change in economic transactions, with long-term implications for trade. It also ushered in usury (money-lending). Pali texts contain many references to this profession, instruments of credit, people pawning their possessions, the occasional pledging of wife or children by debtors, and bankruptcy. Debtors were in fact debarred from joining the Buddhist sangha until they had paid their debts. It is interesting to note that the increasing range of material goods available for consumption—at least for those who had the requisite resources—was paralleled by the emergence of doctrines that advocated the renunciation of material possessions. THE NEW SOCIAL ELITES: THE GAHAPATI AND SETTHI The social vocabulary of early Pali texts reflects the economic and social changes that took place in north India in c. 600–300 BCE. New terminology emerged and old words were endowed with new meaning. Textual evidence indicates the emergence of socioeconomic classes, with significant differences in wealth, status, and control over productive resources. The term grihapati occurs in Vedic literature in the sense of the head of a household. The Pali texts tend to use terms such as gihi, gahattha, and ajjhavasati in this sense, and gahapati (the Pali form of grihapati) in a broader sense (see Chakravarti, 1987: 65–93). Uma Chakravarti points out that apart from being the head of a household, the gahapati was also a wealthy property- owner and producer of wealth, associated especially with land and agriculture. Society is often described as consisting of three strata—Khattiya, Brahmana, and gahapati—associated with three different domains. According to the Anguttara Nikaya, the Khattiya aspires for power and territory, and dominion is his ideal; the Brahmana is associated with mantra and yanna (yajna), and brahmaloka is his ideal; the gahapati is associated with kamma (work) and sippa (craft), and the completion or fruit of work is his ideal. There are references to Brahmana gahapatis living in Brahmana villages. The gahapati’s political importance is suggested in his inclusion among the seven treasures of the chakkavatti or ideal ruler of the world. The setthi (this is the Pali form of Sanskrit sreshthin) of the Pali canon was a high-level businessman, associated with trade and money-lending. There are many references to extremely wealthy setthis living in style in cities such as Rajagriha and Varanasi. The Mahavagga tells us about the setthi-putta (son of a setthi) Sona Kolivisa. This young man was brought up in such luxurious surroundings that his soft, delicate feet bled when he took to the life of a barefoot monk. This led to his having second thoughts about the monastic way of life. The Buddha is said to have solved the problem by allowing monks to wear shoes. The setthi of the Buddhist texts was a prominent and influential member of the urban community with access to and connections with kings. Gahapati and setthi have specific meanings in early Pali texts and are never used interchangeably. For instance, Anathapindika is consistently referred to as a gahapati; it is only in the Jatakas that he is described as a setthi. Therefore, the occurrence of the compound word setthi-gahapati does not suggest a muddle- headed mixing up of categories. It refers to a person with a rural as well as urban base, one with control over land and business enterprise. The wealth and affluence of setthis and setthi-gahapatis can be gauged from the fact that along with kings, they figure among the clientele of the famous physician Jivaka, and are described as paying thousands of kahapanas in medical bills. Trade and Traders In Buddhist texts, people on the move include the Buddha and his disciples, renunciants belonging to other orders, teachers, students, professionals, kings, soldiers, and traders. All these different kinds of people must have travelled along broadly similar routes and the accounts of their journeys give an idea of the routes of travel, communication, and trade. Archaeological evidence also helps identify trade routes and interactions. The two major trans-regional routes of the time were known as the Uttarapatha and Dakshinapatha (these terms were also sometimes used to refer to regions). These routes had a long and enduring history extending over many centuries. The Uttarapatha was the major trans-regional trade route of northern India. It stretched from the northwest, across the Indo-Gangetic plains, up to the port of Tamralipti on the Bay of Bengal. The Ashtadhyayi mentions various kingdoms located along it. Details of the route can be worked out on the basis of references in the Vinaya Pitaka and Jatakas. The Uttarapatha had a northern and a southern sector (Lahiri, 1992: 367–77). The northern sector ran through Lahore, Jalandhar, Saharanpur, along the Gangetic plains to Bijnor, and then through Gorakhpur, towards Bihar and Bengal. The southern sector connected Lahore, Raiwind, Bhatinda, Delhi, Hastinapura, Kanpur, Lucknow, Varanasi, and Allahabad, and then moved on towards Pataliputra and Rajagriha. There were many feeder routes connected to the main artery of the Uttarapatha. For instance, one connected it with Rajasthan (an important source of metals and minerals), another with Sindh, and yet another to the Orissa coast. Nayanjot Lahiri’s analysis (1992: 370–71) indicates that archaeological evidence corroborates the literary sources. The distribution of PGW settlements suggests a broad similarity of material culture and cultural interaction across many regions of north India, stretching from Cholistan to the upper Ganga plains. By the NBPW phase, there is archaeological corroboration for the entire stretch of the Uttarapatha. The wide distribution of NBPW itself suggests wide- ranging inter-regional contacts. Raw materials and finished goods were also moving up and down the route. For instance, lapis lazuli from Afghanistan and central Asia are found at sites extending from the Swat valley in the northwest to the Burdwan district of Bengal. Silver, which may have been an import from the same region (though it was also available in Rajasthan) and used for making coins, has been found all along the Uttarapatha. Semi-precious stones such as amethyst and topaz were moving from the Rajamahal, Singhbhum, and Dhalbhum areas of eastern India to sites in the middle and upper Ganga valley. Shell was imported from the eastern coast to sites in the lower and middle Ganga valley. The Uttarapatha was a land-cum-river route. Buddhist texts refer to the riverine movement of traders and goods along the Ganga. The distribution of PGW and NBPW sites along this river and its tributaries—especially the Yamuna, Ghaghara, and Sarayu— suggests that rivers formed major communication routes. The Ashtadhyayi and Jatakas mention ferries. But movements across land were clearly also important. Buddhist texts frequently talk of caravans of traders moving along land routes, and Buddhist monks too moved mainly on foot. The Dakshinapatha—the great southern trade route—is mentioned in the Arthashastra, but was operational from the early historical period. It stretched from Pataliputra in Magadha to Pratishthana on the Godavari, and was also connected to ports on the western coast. Although there are several references to trans-Vindhyan regions in Buddhist texts, and more so in the Mahabharata and Ramayana, because of the northern bias of these texts, there is a certain vagueness about the southern routes. Buddhist texts refer to merchants travelling from Pataliputra and Kaushambi to Pratishthana. The Sutta Nipata tells the story of Bavari, a teacher of Kosala, who built a hermitage on the banks of the Godavari in Assaka and sent his disciples on a mission to meet the Buddha. They travelled through Pratishthana, Ujjayini, Vidisha, and on to Shravasti. The physician Jivaka moved along the Dakshinapatha on his way to Avanti. The discovery of PGW in the Malwa region and NBPW in central India and the Deccan provide archaeological corroboration of this route. The Vindhyas provided iron, copper, and various types of stone to settlements in the Ganga valley, and these raw materials must have moved along the northern sector of the Dakshinapatha. Trade and interaction along this route increased in subsequent centuries. Buddhist texts talk of caravans with 1,000 carts moving from one janapada to another, passing through deserted areas. There is mention of caravans paying tolls and taxes to the king’s men. Customs officials (kammikas) levied taxes on merchandise and could confiscate the goods of tax evaders. There are stories of robbers who waylaid traders and monks moving along the roads that connected the big cities. It was the job of royal officials known as rajabhatas to safeguard the lives and property of such travellers. MAP 6.3 MAJOR TRADE ROUTES OF EARLY HISTORICAL INDIA The internal trade routes joined the external routes, which linked the subcontinent with other areas. Overland routes connecting Taxila with north Afghanistan and Iran were important for obtaining raw materials such as silver, gold, lapis lazuli, and jade. There may have been a long-distance trade in fine wood between India and Mesopo-tamia. The central Asia route had been important from neolithic times onwards. The route via the Bolan pass and through north Afghanistan was also important. Cities such as Taxila and Charsada were major commercial centres. The routes into India from the northwest were followed not only by traders but also by invading Persian and Macedonian armies. The route from Bengal to Myanmar was also probably important, and jade may have been an import from the latter region. Sea travel and trade are mentioned in the Pali canon. The Anguttara Nikaya refers to sea merchants who had a bird aboard their ship to sight land. There is mention of the maritime route to West Asia. The Jatakas contain many accounts of sea voyages. Commodities such as sandalwood and pearls were probably exported from sites along the eastern and western coasts to West Asia and the Mediterranean. Maritime trade with Southeast Asia also began in the early historical period. The expansion of trade led to the emergence of traders as an important urban group. It was no doubt because of their economic affluence that Buddhist texts describe vanijja (trade) as one of the high occupations. Class, Kinship, Varna, and Caste From the 6th century BCE, there is evidence of the emergence of socioeconomic classes in north India. Buddhist texts refer to disparities in wealth and status. There are references to very poor (dalidda) people. Contrasts are drawn between fortunate wealthy people and unfortunate poor people (mahabhoga kula, dalidda kula; sadhana, adhana; sugata, dugata). The roots of such disparities lay in differences in control over productive resources, especially land. Despite the emergence of socioeconomic classes, kinship ties continued to be extremely important, and were eventually incorporated into the framework of caste. Nati and nati-kulani are terms that refer to the extended kin group, beyond the immediate family. Natakas included relatives on both the mother and father’s side. Kula denotes an extended patrilineal family. The importance of kinship is shown by the fact that although Buddhist monks were supposed to have renounced family ties, monastic rules were bent to make allowances for them. For example, monks were ordinarily forbidden to travel during the vassavasa (the monsoon retreat), but some contact with members of the family could be maintained during this period. They were not generally supposed to go to the battlefield, but could do so to visit a sick or dying kinsman. We can also note the influence of kinsfolk such as Mahapajapati Gotami and Ananda on the Buddha himself, for instance, on the issue of admitting women to the sangha. To a certain extent, the Buddhist monastic order offered an alternative bonding of brotherhood (sisterhood, in the case of nuns) replacing the worldly mesh of kinship relationships. However, the fact that it did not try to completely replace or obliterate conventional kinship bonds shows just how strong these were at the time. The four-fold order of varnas (hereditary classes) was central to the social discourse of the Brahmanical tradition. The varnas were ideally supposed to be endogamous, i.e., marriage was supposed to take place within the group. But the Dharmashastra accepted certain types of inter-varna marriages between a man of a higher varna and a woman of a lower varna. Such hypergamous marriages were known as anuloma marriages. On the other hand, marriages between a woman of a higher varna and a man of a lower varna (hypogamy) were referred to as pratiloma unions, and were not approved of. The worst sort of pratiloma union was between a Brahmana woman and a Shudra man. The fact that these texts discuss and grade inter-varna marriages suggests that such marriages did take place and that varnas were not strictly endogamous. Dharmashastra texts also reveal the gap between theory and practice in the relationship between varna and occupation in their theory of apad-dharma (dharma in times of distress or emergency). In ideal circumstances, people of the four varnas must follow the vocations prescribed for them: The ideal activities of the Brahmana are studying and teaching the Veda, performing sacrifices for himself and others, and giving and receiving gifts. Those of the Kshatriya are studying, performing sacrifices for himself, bestowing gifts, and more especially, protecting people. The Vaishya shares the first three activities, but his ideal occupations are agriculture, cattle rearing, trade, and money-lending. The Shudra was supposed to obtain his livelihood by serving the higher varnas. However, in times of emergency, adversity, or distress, a person could be forced to pursue vocations that would normally be considered inappropriate for members of his varna. This, according to the Dharmashastra, was perfectly all right. The fact that they had to stretch their ideal scheme in relation to the two important issues of marriage and occupation shows that people were in fact not following the regular norms of varna-dharma. PRIMARY SOURCES Activities in times of adversity The Gautama Dharmasutra (7) explains how varna duties can be transgressed in times of adversity, within certain limits. Note that the main focus is on the Brahmana: These are the rules for times of adversity. A Brahmana may receive Vedic instruction from a non-Brahmana, walk behind him, and obey him. Once the study is completed, however, the Brahmana becomes the more honourable of the two. One may teach, officiate at the sacrifices of, and receive gifts from people of all classes, each preceding occupation being more honourable. When these occupations are unavailable, one may live by the occupations of a Kshatriya, and when even these are unavailable, by the occupations of a Vaishya. One may not trade in the following goods: perfumes, seasonings, prepared foods, sesame seeds, hemp or linen cloth, skins, garments that are dyed red or washed, milk and milk products, roots, fruits, flowers, medicines, honey, meat, grass, water, poisons, and animals for slaughter; and, under any circumstance, human beings, barren cows, heifers, and pregnant cows. According to some, one may also not trade in land, rice, barley, goats, sheep, horses, bulls, milch-cows, and oxen. One is restricted to bartering seasonings for seasonings and animals for animals; but not salt, prepared food, or sesame seeds. One may, however, exchange uncooked food for an equal amount of cooked food for immediate use. When none of this is possible, however, one may sustain oneself by any occupation except that of a Shudra; some permit even that when one’s life is at stake. Even then, however, one is not allowed to mix with that class or eat forbidden food. When his life is at stake, even a Brahmana may live by the use of arms and a Kshatriya may resort to the occupations of a Vaishya. SOURCE Olivelle , 2003: 137 Buddhist and Jaina texts also mention the varna order, but for them, the powerful religious sanction associated with it in the Brahmanical tradition was lacking. It was considered an institution created by people, based on natural inclinations and aptitudes. Further, both these traditions placed the Kshatriya above the Brahmana in the varna hierarchy. Gotra (clan affiliation) was an important basis of Brahmana identity. In Buddhist texts, the Buddha invariably addresses Brahmanas by their gotra. We can also note the use of the gotra name by non-Brahmanas. The Buddha himself is frequently referred to as ‘Gotama’ (the Pali form of Gautama) which is a gotra name, and Mahavira is supposed to have had the Kashyapa gotra. This may have had to do with the position of parity that the Buddhist and Jaina traditions tried to maintain between Brahmanas and their own preceptors. Or it is possible that non-Brahmanas took on the gotra of the Brahmana preceptor associated with their families. Varna was not irrelevant as a basis of social identity, but was now competing with another social institution—jati (caste). The Dharmasutras explain the origins of jatis through the ingenious but fictitious theory of the mixture of varnas (varna-samkara). According to this, jatis were the outcome of various kinds of inter-varna marriages. In this manner, the Dharmashastra tradition was able to stand by the varna theory but acknowledge and explain the existence of jatis. Although there is uncertainty about the extent to which endogamy and, more so, commensality (rules of inter-dining and accepting water and categories of food from others) were fully established at the time, the beginnings of the caste system can be traced to the 6th century BCE. The terms varna, jati, and kula are sometimes used interchangably in ancient texts, while in other places they have a more specific meaning. The varna order was still an important reference point, and the terms Brahmana and Kshatriya had significance. However, while many people in the Pali canon are identified as Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, few are identified as Vaishyas or Shudras. Those who would theoretically have belonged to these two categories are generally described with reference to their specific occupation, which was in turn tied up with kula and jati. This suggests that varna was more a theoretical construct tied to the upper categories and that a person’s identity in the society of the time was based more on occupation, kula (lineage), and jati (caste). Halbfass (1991: 350– 52) suggests that the varna system was the prototype of the jati system; the two were never sharply distinguished in ancient classical literature, and their relationship was marked by a partial overlap, interaction and ‘osmosis’. The English word ‘caste’ comes from the Portuguese castas, which refers to animal and plant species or breeds; as well as to tribes, clans, races or lineages within human societies. It was first used in the context of Indian society by Portuguese traders operating on the western coast in the 16th and 17th centuries. Interpretations of caste are extremely varied, but can be divided into two basic types (Quigley , 2002: 2–3). On the one hand, there is the materialist interpretation, which sees caste as something that rationalizes and camouflages material inequalities through an idiom of purity and pollution. On the other hand, there is the idealist explanation, which views caste as essentially the product of religious and cultural ideas related to purity and pollution. Another interpretation emphasizes the connection between caste and the political domain, specifically the emergence of kingship and kingdoms. KEY CONCEPTS Varna and jati One of the great triumphs of the Brahmanical tradition is that even today, many people persist in thinking that ancient Indian society was for centuries together divided into four groups—Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras—and consider varna to be the basis of jati. This was not so. Varna and jati are both hereditary social classifications and the two did come to be related, but they are not the same thing. There are many differences between them, and the nature of these differences themselves has changed over time: 1. The number of varnas is four (or five, if those outside the varna fold are considered a category), while the number of jatis (including castes and sub-castes) are so numerous that they cannot be counted, and their numbers continue to grow even today. 2. Both varna and jati are hierarchical orderings. However, the ranking among the four varnas is fixed, while the jatis have an element of fluidity within particular ranges. In the Brahmanical tradition, the Brahmana stands at the top and the Shudra at the bottom. In the Buddhist tradition, the Kshatriya comes first and the Brahmana second, but the order is still fixed. It is impossible to rank the jatis on a single scale of highest to lowest. Although the Brahmanas usually stand at the top of the caste hierarchy and the so-called ‘untouchable’ groups represented the lowest boundary, the rank of the castes in between the two could be fluid. The relative ranking of castes in fact varies across regions and localities, and depends on a number of factors including control over land, wealth, and political and military power. Caste ranking can be a matter of dispute, even among Brahmanas and ‘outcastes’. In recent times, castes have often tried to ‘upgrade’ themselves (this process is often referred to as Sanskritization), and sometimes get ‘downgraded’. Upgrading usually involves adopting practices associated with higher castes, e.g., vegetarianism, withdrawal of women into the home, and change in occupation. 3. While there were rules that discouraged social interaction and the acceptance of certain kinds of food by higher varnas from certain types of Shudras, the rules of commensality were more clearly defined and established with reference to the jatis. These were based on ideas of purity and pollution. 4. The varnas were not really endogamous units, since a number of inter-varna marriages (the anuloma ones) were considered permissible. The jatis, on the other hand, were supposed to be endogamous, although certain hypergamous unions may always have been accepted. 5. The varnas are associated with a range of occupations, while the jatis (at least in the beginning) were associated with specific occupations, even while there were certain occupations that were open to all. It has been argued that function is more important than birth in the varna system. The reason why varna and jati got connected is because members of a caste often claim to belong to a certain varna category. The anchoring of the jati system to the varna system was no doubt in order to give the former the legitimacy of the Brahmanical tradition. For many centuries, lineages that managed to achieve political power often claimed to be Kshatriyas. This shows that the varnas may have swiftly become normative categories, but at the same time, they retained an important social function as a key reference point for the caste system. Nevertheless, the real, effective basis of a person’s social identity, the basis of rules of inter-dining, social interaction, marriage, and occupation in early historical north India was jati and not varna. In order to maintain the distinction between varna and jati, it is better to leave the former untranslated. Jati, on the other hand, can be translated as caste (including sub-caste). It is also important to remember that social institutions constantly evolve and change. The function and significance of the categories of varna and jati, too, have changed over time. Therefore, the precise nature of the jati system in ancient times cannot be considered identical to present-day configurations. It is not easy to identify how jatis emerged in the first place. They may have been the result of a combination of factors—the hereditary nature of crafts and occupations, the assimilation of tribal groups into the larger Brahmanical fold, and a social system that privileged birth and regulated hierarchy through marriage rules and endogamy (Jaiswal , 2000: 13–14). Territorial and occupational differences also played important roles in the emergence of segmented identities. The Dharmasutra theory of varna-samkara was no doubt necessary in order to accommodate and ‘place’ different groups within the larger social framework. Pali texts refer to high jatis (ukkatta jati) and low jatis (hina jati). While Brahmanas and Kshatriyas are included among the former, the latter included the Chandalas (Chandala jati), basket makers (vena jati), hunters (nesada jati), charioteers (ukkatta jati), and sweepers (pukkusa jati). The texts clearly connect jati with occupation and convey the idea that the social status of the various jatis varied considerably. The earliest occurrence of the term asprishya in the sense of a social group that was condemned by virtue of birth to be regarded by others as permanently ‘untouchable’ occurs for the first time in a later work—the Vishnu Dharmasutra, composed between the 1st and 3rd centuries CE. But the practice of untouchability, an extreme form of social subordination, marginalization, and oppression, clearly existed from earlier times and was strengthened over time. In early Dharmashastra texts, Chandalas were sometimes categorized as Shudras, but a distinction between the two was established very soon. There were differences among the smritikaras (law givers) about just which groups should be included in the category of untouchables, but there is near unanimity about the inclusion of the Chandalas. The Apastamba Dharmasutra explains the birth of a Chandala as the result of evil deeds committed in a previous life. It states that a Brahmana guilty of stealing gold or the murder of another Brahmana is reborn as a Chandala. The Gautama, Baudhayana, and Vasishtha Dharmasutras, on the other hand, describe the Chandala as the offspring of a Shudra man and Brahmana woman, the most degraded of the pratiloma unions. All these instances emphasize the low origin of the Chandala. The Dharmasutras reflect an attitude of extreme prejudice against the Chandalas, often equating them with dogs and crows. They clearly allude to the idea that contact, even accidental, with the Chandala was polluting. According to the Apastamba Dharmasutra (2.1.2.8–9), if one touches a Chandala, one should immediately plunge in water; if one talks to a Chandala, one should immediately talk to a Brahmana; if one sees him, one should immediately look at luminous bodies in the heavens (the sun, moon, or stars). Contact with other groups considered lowly, collectively known as antyajas, did not require such drastic purification techniques—simply washing the part of the body that had come into contact or sipping water were adequate. Gautama (16, 23, 19) states that a person should not recite the Veda while a corpse or Chandala are in the village. The Dharmasutras lay down severe penances and punishments for men who had sexual relations with Chandala women. The texts of this period contain many references to the existence of male and female slaves. The Digha Nikaya states that a dasa is not master of himself, depends on another, and cannot go where he likes. The Vinaya Pitaka speaks of three kinds of slaves—the antojatako, dhanakkito, and kara-mara-anito. The antojatako seems to refer to the offspring of a woman slave. A slave who is bought is known as dhanakkito. One brought from another country and enslaved is the kara-mara-anito. The Digha Nikaya mentions a fourth type of slave —samam dasavayam upagato, one who has himself accepted enslavement. There are a few references to the manumission of slaves. In fact one of the rules of the Buddhist sangha was that slaves could not join until and unless they were freed by their masters. Given the elitist bias of the literary sources, it is not easy to reconstruct the ways in which groups such as the Chandalas and slaves may have reacted to their subordination and oppression. Chakravarti (1987: 27) has identified two instances of resistance in the Buddhist canon. One is a reference in the Vinaya Pitaka to the dasa-kammakaras of the Sakyas attacking the womenfolk of their masters in the woods as an act of vengeance. The second is the story of the dasi Kali and her mistress, the gahapatni Vaidehi, in the Majjhima Nikaya. Vaidehi had a reputation of being extremely gentle and even-tempered. Kali was submissive and hard-working, and came to the conclusion that her mistress’ even temper was the result of her own exemplary conduct. She decided to subject Vaidehi to a test. She started waking up late and did not respond to her mistress’ calls three days in a row. Vaidehi couldn’t take it. She got more and more angry and finally attacked Kali in fury. Kali was proved right. While it is indeed possible to identify such reflections of social tension and conflict in ancient Indian texts, it is much more difficult to uncover the textures of the lives, voices, and ideas of subordinated and marginalized groups. This is because subordination and marginalization generally involved an exclusion from literary culture. One of the challenges for historians is to carefully and creatively read between the lines of the available texts, in order to retrieve the histories of people who lived beyond the margins of elite society. Gender, Family, and Household The macro-level political, economic, and social changes of the time were connected to developments at the level of the family and the household. Changing times demanded new ethics. Strict control over women’s sexuality and reproductive potential was essential for the patrilineal transmission of property and for the maintenance and perpetuation of the endogamous caste structure. The strengthening of patriarchal authority within the household and the emphasis on certain norms related to marriage and the chastity of women were the means of effecting such control. Buddhist and Jaina texts prescribe the ideal conduct for members of the monastic community as well as for householders. However, it is the Brahmanical Dharmasutras and Grihyasutras that reflect the most systematic and comprehensive attempts to authoritatively define and regulate social values and practices. This is not surprising, given the centrality of grihastha (the householder stage) in this tradition. Whether we look at Brahmanical or Buddhist texts, it is necessary to distinguish between the ideal situation projected in them and the actual situation that prevailed in their time. This requires reading between the lines and against the grain. Apart from the married couple, the household could include their unmarried children, married sons and their families, the husband’s parents, slaves, and servants. Terms used for the household unit are kutumba (this is rare), ghara, and the more frequent kula. The kulapati was the head of the family, kulaputa refers to junior males. While the household continued to be the basic unit of agricultural labour, household labour was now often supplemented by wage labourers and, to a lesser extent, by slaves. The institution of marriage was central to the life of the householder. In Buddhist texts, the type of marriage most approved of is one arranged by parents and where the bride and groom are young and chaste. There is reference to ahava (literally, ‘the leading’, i.e., of the bride by her family) and vivaha (literally, ‘leading away’, i.e., of the bride by the groom’s family). It is not certain whether ahava and vivaha were two different ceremonies or the same one. The Vinaya Pitaka mentions 10 kinds of unions between a man and woman: (1) When a woman is bought by money (dhanakkhita); (2) when she stays of her own accord with a man (chhandavasini); (3) when a man gives her money (bhogavasin); (4) when a man gives her clothes (patavasini); (5) when an ablution of water is performed (odapattakani); (6) when she removes her headgear (obhatachumbata); (7) when she is also a female slave (dasinama); (8) when she is also a servant (kammakari); (9) when she is temporarily with a man (muhuttika); and (10) when she is captured in a raid (dhajahata). Except for the chhandavasini union, all the others involve either some sort of economic exchange or the already subordinate position of the woman. The references to unions where the ablution of water is performed and where the woman removes her headgear suggest the performance of some ceremony (Wagle, 1966: 96, 98). The Dharmasutras classify marriages into eight types: Brahma, Daiva, Arsha, Prajapatya, Gandharva, Asura, Rakshasa, and Paishacha. This idea is elaborated on in the Smritis. The Brahma marriage is one in which a father adorns and honours his daughter with garments and ornaments, and gifts her to a man who is learned in the Veda and of good conduct. The Daiva marriage is when a father adorns and honours his daughter with garments and ornaments, and gives her in marriage to an officiating priest in the course of the performance of a sacrifice. This form only applies to Brahmanas. The Arsha form involves the gift of a daughter after taking a pair of cattle (a cow and bull) or two pairs, in order to fulfil customary law, not as a sale of the daughter. The Prajapatya marriage is one in which the father gifts the daughter after saying to the couple, ‘May both of you perform your religious duties together’, and after he has honoured the groom with the appropriate ceremonies such as the madhuparka. The Asura marriage is one in which a girl is given away by the father after the bridegroom hands over as much wealth as he can afford to the bride and her relatives. The Gandharva type is a union between a man and woman through mutual love and consent. The Rakshasa type is when a woman is forcibly abducted from her home, her relatives often being beaten or killed. The Paishacha form is when a man has sex with a girl while she is asleep, intoxicated, unconscious, or mentally disordered. The types of marriages were arranged in a descending scale of propriety, and not all of them were approved of by the smritikaras. The Brahma was considered the best and the Paishacha the lowest. In fact, the last three types are not so much marriages as unions in which women were acquired in different ways, and which were supposed to be followed by marriage rites. The Dharmasutra classification of marriages into various types suggests the prevalence of variations in marriage practices, including dowry and bride-price. The early Dharmasutras suggest that girls should be married off as soon as they attained puberty. The Gautama Dharmasutra (18.20–23) states that a father incurs sin if he does not ensure this, and that a girl should wait for three months after she has started menstruating, after which she should find her own husband. The Baudhayana Dharmasutra (4.1.12) recommends that a father should marry his daughter off to a man devoid of good qualities rather than keep her at home after she attains puberty. Almost all the Grihyasutras begin their discussion of the samskaras with the marriage rites. The number and sequence of the rituals vary considerably. Even the verses of the vivaha-sukta, a late hymn from the Rig Veda, are rearranged, and not all of them are used (Roy, 1994a). The marriage rituals expressed many important relationships, not only between husband and wife, but also among their larger kin group. Ceremonies such as mounting the stone, the groom grasping the bride’s hand, and his pointing to the pole star—are imbued with multiple meanings. The priest now dominated the central ceremony, which was performed in the girl’s parental home. The relationship between husband and wife had many different aspects, including mutual support and friendship, sexual and procreative activity, and the subordination of the wife to the husband. In connection with the marriage ceremonies, Apastamba Grihyasutra 1.2.15 states that practices devised by women could be adopted. These practices are not specified, but were clearly important enough to be acknowledged. Apart from marriage, the Grihyasutras describe several other domestic rites of passage as well, systematizing them and giving them a firm Brahmanical mooring by underlining the importance of Brahmana priests and the close relationship between the grihapati and the domestic fire. The early Dharmasutras do not approve of widow remarriage. However, they specify the number of years an abandoned woman must wait for her husband before she remarries. Both Gautama and Baudhayana refer to the paunarbhava (son of a woman who has married again) in the list of sons. The early smritikaras had an ambivalent attitude towards niyoga, the ancient custom of a widow cohabiting with her brother-in-law or another man in order to produce sons. Gautama discusses various views on the matter and acknowledges sons born of niyoga as legal heirs to property. On the other hand, Baudhayana (2.2.40) states that the son belongs to the one who sows the seed (the male), and women must therefore be guarded against having sexual relations with men other than their husbands. This text considered niyoga unions and their offspring sinful. FURTHER DISCUSSION Marriage, according to the Grihyasutras There are several variations in the details and sequence of events and ceremonies leading up to marriage in the Grihyasutras. However, the following basic framework can be identified: 1. The time for the marriage should be fixed during the northern movement of the sun along its course, in the period of the waxing moon and on an auspicious day. 2. The groom-to-be sends learned Brahmanas as messengers to the girl’s house to convey his acceptance of the marriage. Relatives from both sides accept the alliance. 3. The bride-to-be is specially bathed, her hair washed. 4. The prospective groom kindles the fire and makes a number of offerings. 5. Kanyadana (giving away the daughter): The participants sit around the fire. The father gives his final, oral acceptance of the union. Gifts are exchanged. 6. Madhuparka: The bridegroom is honoured by offering him a seat, washing his feet, and offering him a honey mixture. He is then offered meat of a cow, goat, fish or some vegetarian fare. 7. Hastagrabha/Panigrahana: After the fire is established and the appropriate offerings made into it, the husband grasps the bride’s hand saying, ‘I take hold of your hand for happiness.’ Different ways of grasping the hand are supposed to determine the sex of future progeny. 8. Lajahoma: The bride makes three offerings of lajas (roasted grain) mixed with shami leaves, while the bridegroom recites certain formulae. 9. The bride or the couple step on a stone to attain stability. 10. Agniparinayana: The groom takes the bride around the fire, saying, ‘I am this, you are she, you are she, I am this; I am heaven, you are the earth; I am the Saman, you are the Rik. Let us both marry here. Let us beget offspring. Dear to each other, bright, having well-disposed minds, may we live for a hundred years.’ (Steps 8, 9, and 10 are supposed to be performed one after the other and repeated three times.) 11. Saptapadi: This consists of walking seven steps together. The seven steps are marked with rice placed to the north of the fire, and the groom makes the bride step on these, starting with the right foot every time. The groom says, ‘May you take one step for sap; a second step for juice (or vigour); a third step for the thriving of wealth; a fourth step for comfort; a fifth step for offspring; a sixth step for seasons; may you be my friend with your seventh step. May you be devoted to me; let us have many sons, may they reach old age.’ Water is sprinkled on the heads of the bride and groom. The spectators depart; the groom gives gifts to the Brahmanas and the bride’s father. The couple leaves for the groom’s house, carrying their householder’s fire along with them. According to most texts, the marriage rite ends with the saptapadi. There are a number of other rites when the couple arrives at the groom’s house. These include the dhruvarundhatidarshana, in which the husband points to the pole star and urges his wife to be as stable and firm. According to some authorities, it is this ritual that marks the end of the marriage rite. SOURCE Apte, 1978: 117–28; Kane [1941b], 1974: 527–40 The process of defining and redefining rituals was reflected in the emphasis on the pancha-mahayajnas (Kane , 1974: 696–704). These are mentioned in later Vedic texts, but become more important and are now described as obligatory for Brahmanas. The five mahayajnas were brahmayajna (the study and teaching of the Veda), pitriyajna (offerings to the ancestors), daivayajna (offerings made into the fire), bhutayajna (offerings made to all beings), and manushyayajna (honouring guests). Unlike the shrauta sacrifices, they were to be performed by the householder himself, without the intercession of priests. Initially, they seem to have been considered a way of discharging a man’s duties to the various beings in the universe. Later Dharmashastra texts explain them as atonement for injury or death caused to various beings as part of daily household activities, e.g., in the hearth, grinding mill, broomstick, winnowing basket, mortar and pestle, and water jar. It is interesting to note that these mahayajnas were actually simple ceremonies performed by the householder, and were yajnas only metaphorically speaking. Sapinda relationships were central to the Dharmashastra discussion on rules of marriage, inheritance, and rules of purity and impurity to be observed among relatives when a person died. Brahmanical texts prohibit marriage among sapindas. This prohibition was supposed to apply to all varnas, including Shudras. As explained by Kane (, 1974: 452–58), later Dharmashastra texts give different interpretions of the term sapinda. According to one view, the sapindas are connected by virtue of their sharing particles of the same body. Father, son, and grandson are sapindas because the particles of the body of the father are transmitted to the son and, further on, to the son’s son. The son also has sapinda relations with his mother, because the mother’s body particles continue in him. Extending the same reasoning further, a person has sapinda relations with his mother’s father, sister, and brother. Husband and wife are sapindas because they produce a son through their bodies. The wives of brothers are sapindas because they produce sons from their husbands, who are produced from the same body, (i.e., their father). Marriages are not supposed to take place between people who fall within the sapinda circuit up to a certain specified number of generations. Lawgivers such as Yajnavalkya count five ascending and descending generations on the mother’s side and seven ascending and descending relations on the father’s side as defining the sapinda circuit. But other lawgivers had different opinions about the number of degrees of relationship and the precise point at which the dividing line between permissible and unpermissible marriages was to be drawn. The Apastamba Dharmasutra (1.7.21.8) categorically states that sexual relations with the uterine relations (mothers and sisters) of one’s parents and their children are a sin. This would rule out marriage between a man and the daughter of his maternal uncle or paternal aunt. However, the same text (1.19– 26) goes on to say that marrying one’s maternal uncle’s daughter or paternal aunt’s daughter is one of the customary practices of the south. Baudhayana states that those who follow these practices in other areas (i.e., in north India), incur sin, thereby extending tacit approval to the practice in the south. However, other smritikaras forbade cross-cousin marriages, regardless of the geographical or customary context. This suggests that marriage customs varied in different regions and the smritikaras were divided on whether or not to sanction them. Texts of the period refer to monogamous and polygynous marriages. The Vasishtha Dharmasutra (1.24) states that a Brahmana can have three wives, a Kshatriya two, and a Vaishya and Shudra only one. The possibility of divorce and remarriage in some circumstances is suggested by the story (Digha Nikaya 2) of Mahagovinda, who, when he decided to renounce the world, offered to give his 40 wives to another man, if they so desired. They declined and decided to follow him on to the path of renunciation. Severe consequences were laid down for women who committed adultery. In the Vinaya Pitaka (4), a Lichchhavi man consults other members of his clan to get their consent to kill his wife for committing adultery. Marriages were patrilocal. The early Grihyasutras have a great deal to say regarding relationships between members of the household. The grihapati (householder) was the centre and master of the household unit. The household was essential for progeny and to fulfil the debt the householder owed his ancestors. Jaya S. Tyagi’s study (2002) shows that the wife was considered as having destructive as well as constructive potential within the household. She could be the destroyer of praja (progeny), pashu (animals), and pati (husband). She is also jaya (this is the most frequently used term)—bearer of her husband’s children. The texts are divided on the question of whether or not the wife could perform the grihya (domestic) rituals. Some Grihyasutras state that a woman could perform rites such as the morning and evening offerings in the domestic fire. But she could not act independently as a yajamana in the bigger sacrifices. On the death of the wife, the widower was supposed to cremate her with flames kindled from their domestic fire. He was to establish a new fire when he remarried. Texts such as the Ashvalayana Grihyasutra state that when a woman’s husband died, she was to lie on the pyre, but should be drawn away from it by a brother-in-law or certain other designated males before it was lit. This symbolized her willingness to accompany her husband to the other world (this is reminiscent of a similar practice mentioned in the Atharva Veda), but her place was among the living. The emergence of private property in land had important implications for the structure and function of the family. The inheritance of property became an important issue. Inheritance was patrilineal. Buddhist texts suggest that the property of both mother and father was generally divided among sons. Where there were no sons, the property went to the next of kin or was taken over by the state. In the Vinaya Pitaka, Sudinna Kalandaka’s mother begs her son who has become a monk to produce an heir; otherwise the family property would go to the Lichchhavis. The Samyutta Nikaya refers to the property of a setthi-gahapati, who died without male heirs, being taken over by king Prasenajit. Wives and daughters seem to have been excluded from the deceased man’s inheritance. Certain Buddhist texts refer to a father sometimes transferring his property in favour of his son or some other close male relative during his lifetime. The Dharmashastra views on inheritance rights, especially those of women, have been summarized and analysed by Kane (, 1973: 700–36). In general, male heirs, especially sons, took precedence over all others. The Baudhayana Dharmasutra includes a man’s brothers, his son, grandson, and great grandson from a wife of the same varna as the core group of inheriters of his property. The Apastamba Dharmasutra (2.6.14.2) states that if a son cannot inherit the property, it should go to the nearest sapinda; although it mentions the daughter, it does not mention the wife as a possible heir. Gautama (28.19) states that the wealth of a person who dies heirless should go to his sapindas, sagotras, or wife. Generally, the claims of the daughter came after those of the wife. Later Dharmashastras often excluded the wife from inheriting her husband’s property or set preconditions of chastity before she could claim such a right. There was, however, a category of property—the stri-dhana—over which the smritikaras conceded that a woman did have rights. Stri-dhana means ‘women’s property’, but referred specifically to certain special kinds of moveable property given to a woman on various occasions during her lifetime. These included presents (jewellery, clothes, household articles, etc.) given by her parents at the time of marriage and by her relatives (father, brothers, etc.) on other occasions. While the Dharmashastra texts disagreed about the extent to which stri-dhana was to be considered the permanent property of a woman, they generally agreed that it was to be passed on from mother to daughter (Kane , 1973: 770– 802). Given the increasingly patriarchal nature of the household, it is not surprising that the preference for sons over daughters continued. The son was considered necessary for the performance of the father’s funerary rites, the propitiation of the ancestors, and the continuation of the lineage. The Digha Nikaya refers to parents desiring sons because they add to family possessions, continue the family line, inherit the father’s property, and pay homage to his ancestors. The Vinaya Pitaka refers to people accusing the Buddha of destroying families by making them sonless (by encouraging men to renounce the world). In the Samyutta Nikaya (1), the Buddha is presented as consoling Prasenajit, king of Kosala, who was upset at the birth of a daughter: ‘A female child,’ he tells the king, ‘may prove an even better offspring than a male one. For she may grow up wise and virtuous. She will honour her mother-in-law and be faithful to her husband (patibbata). The boy she may bear may do great deeds.’ These words sum up the ideals associated with womanhood. At the same time, we must note that the renunciant orders, including Buddhism, created an alternative to the householder life for both men and women. It is important to remember that social customs must have varied considerably depending on social group, region, and locality. As mentioned in Chapter 1, Dharmashastra acknowledged three sources of dharma—shruti, smriti, and sadachara or shishtachara (custom). The Baudhayana Dharmasutra (1.1.1.2) in fact refers to certain customs that are peculiar to the south and north. The southern customs mentioned are: eating in the company of an uninitiated person (i.e., one who has not undergone the sacred thread ceremony), eating in the company of one’s wife, eating stale food, and marrying the daughter of a maternal uncle or paternal aunt. The customs peculiar to the north are: dealing in wool, drinking alcohol, selling animals that have teeth in the upper and lower jaws, following the trade of arms, and going to sea. The text states that for these practices, custom should be considered the authority, but following these practices in places where they are not customary is not permissible. However, it also states that the lawgiver Gautama disagreed and considered all these practices of southerners and northerners as opposed to the tradition of the shishtas (learned Brahmanas), and therefore not permissible anywhere. It must also be remembered that texts tend to tell us about practices and norms for the upper classes of society. The samskaras of the Dharmashastra texts, for instance, explicitly exclude the Shudras. The Renunciatory Tradition The Renunciatory Tradition This age of urban affluence, of communities marked by distinctions of class and caste, was also an age of renunciants who advocated giving up attachment to all material things and social relationships. The renunciants were referred to by various terms including paribbajaka (Sanskrit—parivrajaka, ‘wanderer’), samana (Sanskrit—shramana, ‘one who strives’, i.e., to realize the truth), and bhikkhu (Sanskrit—bhikshu, ‘one who lives by begging alms’). These were people who had left their homes and lived as wanderers, dependent on food and alms offered by sympathetic or generous householders. Renunciation and asceticism were not entirely new ideas. Although the householder was central to the Vedic tradition, Vedic texts contain words such as vanaprasthi, tapasi, yogi, yati, vairagi, muni, vaikhanasa, and sannyasi—all of which have elements of ascetic or renunciatory connotations (Bhagat, 1976). Furthermore, the married householder, though central to the cult of the sacrifice, was irrelevant to the Upanishadic quest for knowledge. The early Dharmasutras contain the first detailed references to the four ashramas— brahmacharya (celibate studenthood), grihastha (the householder stage), vanaprastha (partial renunciation), and sannyasa (total renunciation). Olivelle’s study of the ashrama system (1993) indicates that initially, the four ashramas were considered four alternative ways of life that a snataka (a young man who had completed his course of Vedic study) could choose from. Olivelle suggests that the authors of this scheme may have been part of a stream of thought represented in some of the early Upanishads against ritualism, and in favour of celibacy and individual choice. There were differences of opinion among the early Dharmasutras about the legitimacy and relative merits of the ashramas. The Gautama and Baudhayana Dharmasutras are critical of the ashrama scheme. Gautama presents the idea of the ashramas as a view held by others. He asserts that a young man who had completed his period of study must enter the grihastha stage, and that this requirement was based on the authority of the Veda. The Baudhayana Dharmasutra describes the idea of the four ashramas as the invention of a devil named Kapila and asserts that marriage, procreation, and the performance of sacrifices are essential. The Apastamba Dharmasutra accepts the ashrama scheme, denies that the celibate ashramas are superior to the householder stage, and describes all ashramas as of equal value. The appropriate time for entering the third and fourth ashramas was also an issue of debate. The Smritis put the ashramas together as an ideal package of four consecutive stages in the life of a dvija male. Though renunciation was ultimately incorporated into the ashrama scheme in the sannyasa stage, the renunciation advocated by Buddhist and Jaina traditions was different. It could extend over an entire adult life span, and entry into it had a special urgency because it was considered the only way to attain knowledge and liberation. It was open to all, regardless of class, caste, or gender. And by renouncing the world, the renunciant did not walk his own solitary path, but entered a community of renunciants. The householder and renunciant represented two extremes of the social and a- social worlds. In Buddhist and Jaina traditions, their relationship was one of opposition as well as dependence. Renunciants were dependent on the generosity of householders for food and material sustenance. Householders, for their part, turned to renunciants for instruction and wisdom. The worlds of the renunciant and householder were thus two very different but connected worlds. The 6th–5th centuries BCE are often known as the age of the Buddha and Mahavira. While these two men were certainly among the most influential thinkers of their time and left their mark in the long term, there were many other renunciant teachers who provided different answers to the mysteries and travails of existence. However, neither the schools not the texts associated with them have survived. They are only known through fleeting and generally unflattering portrayals in texts of their more successful Buddhist and Jaina rivals. The similarities between some of the shramana doctrines and practices and the stories of encounters and conversations between their leaders suggest an element of interaction between their proponents. But the competition for adherents also generated tension, if not hostility. According to Buddhist texts, Purana Kassapa was a teacher who rejected the distinction between moral and immoral and denied that actions had consequences. He taught that good actions (like liberality, self-control, and honesty) did not lead to the accumulation of any merit and that deeds like killing, stealing, and lying were not sinful. Ajita Keshakambalin taught a materialist doctrine. According to him, actions earned neither merit nor demerit,