BOOK: india-after-gandhi CHAPTER: The Biggest Gamble in History PAGES: 211-250 Besides grain, peasants grew a wide range of fruit crops, as well as market- oriented produce such as cotton and sugar cane. These variations notwithstanding, everywhere in India agriculture was largely empirical, based on knowledge and traditions passed down over the generations, rather than on ideas from books. Everywhere it was chiefly based on local inputs. The water, the fuel, the fodder, the fertilizer; these were all gathered in the vicinity of the village. The land was tilled with a plough pulled by a pair of bullocks. The homes were built of wood and thatch fetched by hand from the nearby forests. Everywhere, those who worked on the land lived cheek-by-jowl with those who didn’t. The agriculturists who made up perhaps two-thirds of the rural population depended crucially on the service and artisanal castes: on blacksmiths, barbers, scavengers and the like. In many parts there were vi- brant communities of weavers. In some parts there were large populations of nomadic pastoralists. On the social side, too, there were similarities in the way in which life was lived across the subcontinent. Levels of literacy were very low. Caste feelings were very strong, with villages divided into half a dozen or more en- dogamous jatis. And religious sentiments ran deep. Rural India was pervaded by an air of timelessness. Peasants, shepherds, carpenters, weavers, all lived and worked as their forefathers had done. As a survey of the 1940s putit, ‘there is the same plainness of life, the same wrest- ling with uncertainties of climate (except in favoured areas), the same love of simple games, sport and songs, the same neighbourly helpfulness, and the same financial indebtedness’.1 To the Indian nationalist, however, continuity was merely a euphemism for stagnation. Agricultural productivity was low; hence also levels of nutri- tion and health. About the only thing that was rising was population growth. From the late nineteenth century, as medical services expanded, the death rate rapidly fell. Consequently, since the birth rate remained constant, there was a steady rise in population. Between 1881 and 1941 the population of British India rose from 257 to 389 million. But (or hence) the per capita availability of food grains declined from an already low level of200 kilograms per person per year to a mere 150. Almost from the time the Congress was founded in 1885, Indian nation- alists had charged the British with exploitation of the peasantry. They resolved that when power came to them, agrarian reform would be at the top of their agenda. Three programmes seemed critical. The first was the abolition of land revenue. The second was the massive expansion of irrigation, both to aug- ment productivity and reduce dependence on the monsoon. The third was the reform of the system of land tenure. Particularly in north and east India, the British had encouraged a system of absentee landlordism. In many other dis- tricts too, those who tilled the land usually did not own it. While tenants did not have security of tenure, agricultural labourers had no land to till in the first place. Inequalities in the agrarian economy could be very sharp indeed. The forms of exploitation were manifold and highly innovative. Thus, apart from land tax, zamindars (landowners) in the United Provinces levied an array of additional cesses on their peasants such as mo- torana (to pay for the zamindar’s new car) and hathiana (to pay for his ele- phants).2 The landlord was prone to treat his animals and his vehicles far bet- ter than he did his labourers. Two weeks before Independence a progressive weekly from Madras ran a story about distress in rural Malabar. This pro- filed a large landlord who owned seven elephants, for which he needed some 25,000 kilograms of paddy. His own tenants, meanwhile, were given three days’ ration for the whole week.3 The socialist elements in the Indian National Congress pushed the organ- ization to commit itself to thoroughgoing land reform, as in the abolition of large holdings, the promotion of the security of tenants and the redistribution of surplus land. They also advocated an expansion in the provision of credit to overcome the widespread problem of rural indebtedness.4 But, as the nationalists also recognized, agrarian reform had to be accom- panied by a spurt in industrial growth. The nation needed more factories to ab- sorb the surplus of underemployed labourers in the countryside. It also needed factories to prove to itself that it was modern. To enter the comity of nations, India had to be educated, united, outward looking and, above all, industrial- ized. In colonial times there had existed a sharp divide between factories owned by British firms and those owned by Indians. Jute, for instance, was largely in the hands of the foreigner; cotton textiles in the hands of the native. The Raj was frequently (and for the most part, justly) accused of deliberately discouraging Indian enterprise, and of distorting the tariff and trade structure to favour British firms. While some Indian capitalists were studiously apolitic- al, others had been vigorous supporters of the Congress. They naturally hoped that when freedom came, the biases would be reversed, placing foreign capit- alists at a disadvantage.5 If India had to be industrialized, which model should it follow? To the leaders of the national movement, ‘imperialism’ and ‘capitalism’ were both dirty words. As John Kenneth Galbraith pointed out, ‘until recent times a good deal of capitalist enterprise in India was an extension of the arm of the imper- ial power – indeed, in part its confessed raison d’être. As a result, free enter- prise in Asia bears the added stigmata of colonialism, and this is a formidable burden.’6 What, then, were the alternatives? Some nationalists wrote admiringly of the Soviet Union, and of ‘the extraordinary use they have made of modern sci- entific knowledge in solving their problems of poverty and want’, thus passing in a mere two decades ‘from a community of half-starved peasants to well-fed and well-clad industrial workers’. This had been accomplished by ‘eliminat- ing the profit motive from her industries which belong to and are being de- veloped in the interest of the nation’; by feats of engineering that had made rivers into ‘mighty sources of electric power’; and by a system of planning by disinterested experts which had increased production nine-fold and where ‘unemployment and anarchy of production are unknown’.7 Another much admired model was Japan. Visiting that country during the First World War, the prominent Congress politician Lala Lajpat Rai marvelled at the transformation it had undergone, moving from (agrarian) primitivism to (industrial) civilization in a mere fifty years. Japan, he found, had built its factories and banks by schooling its workers and keeping out foreign competi- tion. The role of the state was crucial – thus ‘Japan owes its present and indus- trial prosperity to the foresight, sagacity and patriotism of her Government’. Once as backward as India, Japan had ‘grown into a teacher of the Orient and a supplier of all the necessaries and luxuries of life which the latter used to get from the Occident’.8 II In 1938 the Congress setup a National Planning Committee (NPC), charged with prescribing a policy for economic development in a soon- to-be-free In- dia. Chaired by Jawaharlal Nehru, the committee had some thirty members in all – these divided almost equally between the worlds of science, industry and politics. Sub-committees were allotted specific subjects: such as agricul- ture, industry, power and fuel, finance, social services and even ‘women’s role in planned economy’. The NPC outlined ‘national self-sufficiency’ and the doubling of living standards in ten years as the main goals. Planning itself was defined as ‘the technical co-ordination, by disinterested experts, of con- sumption, production, investment, trade, and income distribution, in accord- ance with social objectives set by bodies representative of the nation’.9 From Japan and Russia the NPC took the lesson that countries that in- dustrialized late had to depend crucially on state intervention. This applied with even more force to India, whose economy had been distorted by two cen- turies of colonial rule. As one NPC report put it, planned development up- held the principle of ‘service before profit’. There were large areas of the eco- nomy where the private sector could not be trusted, where the aims of plan- ning could be realized only ‘if the matter is handled as a collective Public En- terprise’.10 Notably, the private sector concurred. In 1944 a group of leading indus- trialists issued what they called A Plan of Economic Development for India (more commonly known as the Bombay Plan). This conceded that ‘the ex- isting economic organization, based on private enterprise and ownership, has failed to bring about a satisfactory distribution of the national income’. Only the state could help ‘diminish inequalities of income’. But the state was ne- cessary for augmenting production too. Energy, infrastructure and transport were sectors where the Indian capitalists themselves felt the need for a gov- ernment monopoly. In the early stages of industrialization, they argued, it was necessary that ‘the State should exercise in the interests of the community a considerable measure of intervention and control’. Indeed, ‘an enlargement of the positive as well as preventative functions of the State is essential to any large-scale economic planning’.11 Now largely forgotten, the Bombay Plan gives the lie to the claim that Jawaharlal Nehru imposed a model of centralized economic development on an unwilling capitalist class. One wonders what free-market pundits would make of it now. They would probably see it as a dirigiste tract, unworthy of capitalism and capitalists. In truth, it should be seen simply as symptomatic of the Zeitgeist, of the spirit of the times.12 That spirit was all in favour of centralized planning, of the state occupy- ing what was called the ‘commanding heights’ of the economy. Thus the Con- stitution of India directed the government to ensure that ‘the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good’; and that ‘the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common predicament’. Within a month of the adoption of the constitution, the government set up a Planning Commission to carry out these ‘directive prin- ciples’. Chaired by Nehru, the Commission included high Cabinet ministers as well as experienced members of the Indian Civil Service. In the summer of 1951 the Planning Commission issued a draft of the first five-year plan. This focused on agriculture, the sector hardest hit by Par- tition. Besides increasing food production, the other major emphases of the plan were on the development of transport and communications, and the pro- vision of social services. Introducing the proposals in Parliament, Jawaharla Nehru praised the plan as the first of its kind to ‘bring the whole of India – ag- ricultural, industrial, social and economic – into one framework of thinking’. The work of the Commission, he said, had ‘made the whole country “planning conscious”’.13 The expectations of the Planning Commission ran high. As one colum- nist wrote, ‘one drawback of democracy is that it works slower than other political systems. But the people of India will not tolerate undue delay in their economic advancement.’14 After the first general election the urgency intensi- fied. Critics from left and right lambasted the first five-year plan as lacking in vision and ambition. True, food-grain production increased substantially, but output in other sectors failed to reach their targets.15 While introducing the first plan, Nehru had said that ‘it was obvious to me that we have to industrialise India, and as rapidly as possible’. That object- ive was given pride of place in the second five-year plan. Its drafting was the handiwork of Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis, a Cambridge-trained physicist and statistician who was steeped in Sanskrit philosophy and Bengali literature – in sum, ‘an awesome polyglot, the kind of man for whom Nehru was guar- anteed to fall’.16 Mahalanobis was, among other things, the man who brought modern statistics to India. In 1931 he setup the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) in Cal- cutta. Within a decade, he had made the ISI a world-class centre of training and research. He was also a pioneer of inter-disciplinary research, innovat- ively applying his statistical techniques in the fields of anthropology, agro- nomy and meteorology. In February 1949, Mahalanobis was appointed honorary statistical ad- viser to the Union Cabinet. The next year he helped establish the National Sample Survey (NSS) and the year following, the Central Statistical Organ- ization (CSO). These were setup to collect reliable data on changing living standards in India – on wages, employment, consumption and the like. The NSS and the CSO are two reasons why India has a set of official statistics more reliable than those found anywhere else in the non-Western world.17 Such are the uncontentious aspects of Mahalanobis’s legacy. Perhaps more important, and certainly more controversial, are his contributions to the theory and practice of planning. In 1954 Nehru committed his party, and by extension his country, to the creation of a ‘socialistic pattern of society’. The same year, the ISI was asked by the government to study the problem of un- employment. Mahalanobis wrote a note on the subject, which seems to have impressed Nehru enough for him to assign the ISI responsibility for drafting the second five-year plan itself. Mahalanobis took the task very seriously indeed. In the late summer of 1954, he set off for a long tour of Europe and North America. He had, he con- fessed, an ‘inferiority complex about economic matters’. This trip abroad was thus educational – to improve his own knowledge about the subject – but also frankly propagandist. By cultivating foreign economists, he hoped to bring their Indian counterparts around to his own point of view. As he told a friend, ‘at the back of everything is one single aim in my own mind – what effective help can we secure in making our own plans and in implementing them’.18 Mahalanobis first went to the United States of America, where he col- lected information on input–output coefficients, these maintained in a deck of 40,000 Hollerith punched cards. He talked to the man who had done the work (Wassily Leontief, a future Nobellaureate), before crossing the Atlantic to meet the dons of Cambridge. The ‘most brilliant’ of these was Joan Robin- son, then just back from a trip to China (where she was ‘much impressed by the progress they are making’.) She thought that the export–import sector in India needed more government control. Mahalanobis agreed, and in turn asked Joan Robinson to visit India as a guest of the ISI. This, he told her, ‘might be of very great help to us because her support may carry conviction that our approach to Development planning is not foolish. She smiled and said – “Yes, I think I would be able to knock some sense into the heads of the eco- nomists in your country.”’ Mahalanobis now crossed the Channel, to converse with the French Marxists. Then it was time to shift to the other side of the Iron Curtain. He reached Moscow via Prague, and was at once impressed by the ‘amazing’ pace of construction work: buildings far bigger, and built much faster, than any he had ever seen. He had long talks with Soviet academicians, who said that if India wanted ‘to do any serious planning we must have the active help of, not scores, but hundreds of technologists and scientists and engineers’. Mahalanobis agreed, and invited them to visit his country, so urgently in need of ‘specialists and experts in the economics of planning’.19 These travels and talks finally bore fruit in a long paper presented to the Planning Commission in March 1954. Here Mahalanobis outlined eight ob- jectives for the second five-year plan. The first of these was ‘to attain a rapid growth of the national economy by increasing the scope and importance of the public sector and in this way to advance to a socialistic pattern of society’; the second, ‘to develop basic heavy industries for the manufacture of producer goods to strengthen the foundation of economic independence’. Other (and we may presume lesser) objectives included the production of consumer goods by both the factory and household sector, the increasing of agricultural pro- ductivity and the provision of better housing, health and education facilities. The emphasis on capital goods was justified in two principal ways. The first was that it would safeguard this former colony’s economic, and hence political, independence. The second was that it would help solve the press- ing problem of unemployment. ‘Unemployment is chronic because of [the unavailability of] capital goods’, argued Mahalanobis; it occurs ‘only when means of production become idle’. The quickest way to create jobs was to build dams and factories.20 Mahalanobis’s draft plan was submitted to a panel of expert economists. With one exception, all endorsed the emphasis on capital goods and the role of the public sector. To be sure, there were a number of specific caveats. Some economists urged a greater complementarity of agricultural and indus- trial production; others worried about where the funds for the plan would come from. Increasing taxes would not by themselves suffice, while deficit financing might lead to high inflation. Table 10.1 – Sectoral outlays in the first two five-year plans Outlay in first plan Outlay in second plan Sector Total* % Total* % Agriculture and community develop- ment 372 16 530 11 Irrigation 395 17 420 9 Power 266 11 445 10 Industries and minerals 179 7 1075 24 Transport and communications 556 24 1300 28 Social services, housing, etc. 547 25 830 18 * In crores of rupees (1 crore = 10 million). SOURCE: Compiled from A. H. Hanson, The Process of Planning: A Study of India’s Five-Year Plans, 1950–1964 (London: Oxford University Press, 1966), table 7, p. 134. But, on the whole, the leading economists of India were behind what was already being called ‘the Mahalanobis Model of Planning’.21 This model was, among other things, an evocation of the old nationalist model of swadeshi, or self-reliance. Once, Gandhian protesters had burnt for- eign cloth to encourage the growth of indigenous textiles; now, Nehruvian technocrats would make their own steel and machine tools rather than buy them from outside. As the second plan argued, underdevelopment was ‘essen- tially a consequence of insufficient technological progress’.22 Self-reliance, from this perspective, became the index of development and progress. From soap to steel, cashew to cars, Indians would meet their material requirements by using Indian land, Indian labour, Indian materials and, above all, Indian technology. Table 10.1 compares the sectoral outlays for the first and second plans. In proportional terms the sectors of power, transport and communications, and social services, retained broadly the same importance. The decisive shift was from agriculture to industry, this compounded by a decline in the importance of irrigation. While the heavy industries would be owned by the state, there was still plenty of room for private enterprise. For in ‘an expanding economy the private sector would have an assured market’. Their main contribution would come in the form of consumer goods, these to be produced by units large as well as small.23 A government resolution of 1956 classified new industries into three cat- egories. Class I would be the ‘exclusive responsibility of the state; these in- cluded atomic energy, defence-related industries, aircraft, iron and steel, elec- tricity generation and transmission, heavy electricals, telephones, and coal and other key minerals. Class II would witness both public and private sector par- ticipation; here fell the lesser minerals, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, fertilizers, pulp and paper, and road transport. Class III consisted of all the remaining in- dustries, to be undertaken ‘ordinarily through the initiative and enterprise of the private sector’.24 Would the Mahalanobis model succeed? Many Indians thought so, most Indians certainly hoped so. So did their sympathizers worldwide. Represent- ative here are the views of J. B. S. Haldane, the great British biologist who was then planning to move to India and the ISI. When shown the draft plan by Mahalanobis, Haldane commented that Even if one is pessimistic, and allows a 15 per cent chance of failure through interference by the United States (via Pakistan or otherwise), a 10 per cent chance of interference by the Soviet Union and China, a 20 per cent chance of interference with civil service traditionalism and polit- ical obstruction, and a 5 percent chance of interference by Hindu tradi- tionalism, that leaves a 50 per cent chance for a success which will alter the whole history of the world for the better.25 III If Mahalanobis was the chief technician of Indian planning, then Nehru was its chief missionary. The prime minister believed that, in the Indian context, planning was much more than rational economics. It was good politics as well. While the plan was based on the work of economists and statisticians, to real- ize its goal the ‘people must have the sensation of partnership in a mighty enterprise, of being fellow-travellers towards the next goal that they and we have set before us’. Popular participation was the only way to make ‘this Plan, which is enshrined in cold print, something living, vital and dynamic, which captures the imagination of our people’.26 Planning was thus a ‘mighty co-operative effort of all the people of In- dia’. Nehru hoped that the new projects would be a solvent to dissolve the schisms of caste and religion, community and region. Introducing the first plan to his chief ministers, he wrote that ‘the more we think of this balanced picture of the whole of India and of its many-sided activities, which are so in- terrelated with one another, the less we are likely to go astray in the crooked paths of provincialism, communalism, casteism and all other disruptive and disintegrating tendencies’. Introducing the second plan, he called it a ‘brave effort to fashion our future’, that will ‘require all the strength and energy that we possess’. He believed that ‘ultimately this is the only way to deal with the separatism, provincialism and sectarianism that we have to combat’.27 On the economic side, Nehru singled out two activities as providing the ‘essential bases’ for planning: the production of power and the production of steel.28 At Independence, India had only two steel plants, both privately owned, which produced just over a million tones a year. This was inadequate for an expanding economy, more so one that had committed itself to the build- ing of heavy industries. The private sector was barred from starting new enterprises in steel, which, along with coal, shipbuilding, atomic energy and aircraft production, was deemed too important to be subject to the profit motive. The forest belt that runs across central India was rich in iron ore and coal, and it had plenty of rivers too. At once a lively competition began between the states that com- prised this belt, each seeking to have the first public-sector steel plant with in its borders. This was paralleled by a competition between the industrial- ized countries of the West, each of whom wanted the contract to build the first plant.29 The second plan had set a target of 6 million tonnes of steel. The output was needed to provide inputs to other planned industries. But it was also a way of promoting forced savings. As one economist famously put it, ‘you can’t eat steel’. While the second plan was being finalized, the Indian government signed three separate agreements for the construction of steel plants. The Ger- mans would build one in Rourkela in Orissa, the Russians one in Bhilai in Madhya Pradesh, the British one in Durgapur in West Bengal. The Americans, much to their sorrow, had lost out. That the war-ravaged countries of Europe had grabbed two contracts was bad enough, that their hated Cold War rivals had taken the third was worse. Years later an American friend remembered how the decision that Bhilai was going to the Russians was communicated over the radio in tones of palpable sadness by the fabled broadcaster Ed Mur- row.30 The Russians, of course, were delighted. Nikita Khrushchev visited Bhilai and called it the ‘Magnitogorsk of India’. Pravda ran lavish photo fea- tures hailing Bhilai as a symbol of Indo-Soviet co-operation.31 The Indians were more enthusiastic still. A Bengali chemist who worked in Bhilai recalled how his Russian boss had, over the years, become an intimate friend as well. When the time came for the foreign expert to leave, the Indian could not con- tain his tears. The Russian was stoic, but his wife had sympathetic drops trick- ing down her cheeks. For the bereft Bengali, those tears ‘were nothing to me but the drops of the holy water of the Volga, which pervasively mingled with the stream of our Ganges, and inundated our fraternity and imperishable friendship’. In Bhilai, Russian and Indian worked shoulder to shoulder, clearing the land, building the roads and houses, erecting the plant. Those who were part of this effort remembered it with warm affection. It was, recalled one participant, ‘a frenzy without panic, a tempo with a plan. The construction team glowed with pride and satisfaction at the newborn plant they had brought to life, the operation team was anxiously eager to nurture it to its full stature . . . Each of us were helping build the future – a future one could almost see, touch, and feel.’ Finally, in February 1959, under the benign eyes of the president of In- dia, the first flush of molten iron came out of a blast furnace in Bhilai. All around there were tears of joy and rejoicing. Those who were there long re- membered them as ‘the most exciting moments of [their] life’.32 The Indian steel industry was described by a senior official as ‘at once a school of technique and the mainspring of other industrial activities’.33 In fact it was more. The steel factory was a living refutation of the belief that Indians were non-productive and pre-scientific – in a word, backward. IV In the economic modernization of India, large dams occupied a rather special place. They would, on the one hand, emancipate agriculture from the tyranny of the monsoon and, on the other, provide the electric power to run the new industries mandated by the five-year plans. Jawaharlal Nehru was enchanted by dams, which he called ‘the temples of modern India’. His fascination was shared by millions of his country-men, who too came to venerate these tower- ing new monuments built in mud and concrete. Indian intellectuals greatly admired the Tennessee Valley Authority, the integrated project that was a cornerstone of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal. But they also admired the massive multipurpose projects undertaken in the Soviet Union. In the 1940s, anticipating Independence, scientists and engin- eers made trips to America and Russia to acquaint themselves at first hand with how dams were built. They were deeply impressed with what they saw.34 On either side of the Iron Curtain, these projects represented ‘the triumph of science, technology, foresight and centralized government over politics, petty local authorities and powers, ignorance, superstition, and backward- ness’. They represented, indeed, ‘the salvation of the nation through rational- ity and strength’.35 Like North America and Russia, the subcontinent had numerous large rivers. Damming and taming these rivers would kill three birds with one stone; generating electricity, providing water for irrigation and preventing flooding. After a particularly lethal bout of flooding on the Godavari in the monsoon of 1953, a leading engineer wrote to a leading politician that this was a river with enormous potential for good. The destruction caused by floods of this year has, however, demonstrated that if these flood waters are not harnessed for beneficial use, they will constitute a potential threat to the well-being of the people. Properly conserved, these flood waters will sat- isfy all the needs of the Godavari basin and leave ample reserves, which integrated with the Krishna waters will enable irrigation and power bene- fits to be extended right down to Madras and further south . . . No effort should therefore be spared in harnessing of the Godavari waters, in op- timum integration with the Krishna, nor extraneous reasons permitted to delay or jeopardise their consummation.36 Here was a proselytizing technocrat speaking to the already converted. For while the Godavari was still undammed, most of the other major rivers had already come under the hand of man. Among the massive dam projects under way were those on the Mahanadi, Rihand, Tungabhadra, Damodar and Sutlej rivers. In the mid-1950s the political scientist Henry Hart wrote a lyrical ac- count of the transformation of ‘New India’s Rivers’. For Hart, these projects were ‘the greatest of the monuments of free India’; to them ‘men and women come, in a pilgrimage growing season by season, to see for themselves the dams and canals and power stations’. In the book, there is a particularly fine description of the construction of the Tungabhadra dam. When finished, the dam would embody 32 million cu- bic feet of masonry; these laid at the rate of 40,000 cubic feet a day, every day for five years. The sheer scale could properly be conveyed only by means of analogy. ‘Imagine the masonry in Tungabhadra Dam’, wrote Hart, ‘being laid as a highway, 20 feet wide, 6 inches thick. It would extend from Luck now to Calcutta, or from Bombay to Madras.’37 Without question the most prestigious of all these schemes was the Bhakra–Nangal project in northern India. Again, its scale is best narrated in numbers. At 680 feet, the Bhakra dam was the second highest in the world; only the Grand Coulee Dam, on the Colorado river, was higher. The concrete and masonry that would finally go into it was estimated at 500 million cu- bic feet, ‘more than twice the cubic contents of the seven great pyramids of Egypt’. The project would generate nearly a million kilowatts of electricity, while the water from the reservoir would irrigate 7.4 million acres of land, this carried in canals for whose excavation 30 million cubic yards of mud and stone had to be removed.38 This project was a form of compensation for the refugee farmers from West Punjab, a substitute for the canal colonies they had left behind on the other side of the border. These peasants, predominantly Sikh, had ‘a martyr- like yearning to recreate within their own lifetimes the prosperity of which they have been cruelly deprived’. Bhakra-Nangal gave them ‘the field and the resources from which they can rebuild and resettle themselves’. In fact, it gave them more – for in addition to the water there was power, from which the Pun- jabis could, if they so chose, for the first time build an industrial future for themselves. The Bhakra–Nangal project was described in minute detail in a special issue of the Indian Journal of Power and River Valley Development. The issue opened with a set off our most revealing photographs. The first showed the densely wooded site before work began – it carried the caption, ‘River Sutlej at Bhakra in its primeval splendour – the site as it was’. The second showed crane-like structures in the water and a low bridge slung across the gorge: this was ‘Exploratory drilling in river bed with drills mounted on pon- toons – the first invasion’. The third photo, taken apparently in the dry sea- son, showed hillsides by now quite bare, with trucks and bulldozers on the riverbed. Thus ‘Concreting of the Dam begins – man lays the foundation for changing nature’. In the last photo, the dam had begun to rise, aided by ma- chines of a shape and size never before seen in India. This was ‘Excavation with heavy machines in progress in pit-area – the struggle with nature’.39 The men and women who worked at Bhakra were all Indian, with one exception. This was an American, Harvey Slocum. Slocum had little formal education; starting out as a labourer in a steel mill, he had risen to the position of construction superintendent on the Grand Coulee dam. Slocum joined the Bhakra team as chief engineer in 1952 and imprinted upon it his own dis- tinctive style of working. Officers and workers of all levels were mandated to dress uniformly. Slocum himself was at the site at 8 a.m. sharp, staying there until late evening. A stern disciplinarian, he could not abide the sloth and in- efficiency that was rampant around him. Once, when the telephone system broke down, he wrote to the prime minister informing him that ‘only God, not Slocum, could build the Bhakra Dam on schedule’.40 In the first week of July 1954 Nehru visited Bhakra to formally inaugur- ate the project. As he flicked on the switch of the power house, Dakotas of the Indian air force dipped their wings overhead. Next he opened the sluice gates of the dam. Seeing the water coming towards them, the villagers downstream set off hundreds of home-made crackers. As one eyewitness wrote, ‘For 150 miles the boisterous celebration spread like a chain reaction along the great canal and the branches and distributaries to the edges of the Rajasthan Desert, long before the water got there.’41 V In the push to industrialize India, a key role had to be played by technology and technologists. Since his days as a student at Cambridge, Jawaharlal Nehru had been fascinated by modern science. ‘Science is the spirit of the age and the dominating factor of the modern world’, he wrote. Nehru wished that what he called ‘the scientific temper’ should inform all spheres of human activity, including politics. More specifically, in an underdeveloped country like India, science must be made the handmaiden of economic progress, with scientists devoting their work to augmenting productivity and ending poverty.42 At the time of Indian independence a mere 0.1 per cent of GNP was spent on scientific research. Within a decade the figure had jumped to 0.5 per cent; later, it was to exceed 1percent. Under Nehru’s active direction, a chain of new research laboratories was set up. These, following the French model, were es- tablished independently, outside of the existing universities. Within the ambit of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research were some two dozen individual institutes. There was a strong utilitarian agenda at work, with sci- entists in these laboratories encouraged to develop new products for Indians rather than publish academic papers in foreign journals.43 An Indian scientist whom Nehru patronized early and consistently was the brilliant Cambridge-educated physicist Homi Bhabha. Bhabha founded and directed two major scientific institutions. The first was the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay whose work, as its name implies, was aimed mostly at basic research. It had world-class departments of physics and mathematics and also, in time, housed India’s first mainframe computer. The second was the Atomic Energy Commission, mandated to build and run In- dia’s nuclear power plants. This was handsomely funded by the government with an annual budget, in 1964, of about Rs100 million.44 Many new engineering schools were also started. These included the flagship Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), five of which were inaugur- ated between 1954 and 1964. Like the new laboratories, the new colleges were intended to augment indigenous technical capability. Both Nehru and Bhabha were determined to lessen India’s dependence on the West for scientific ma- terials and know-how. They believed that ‘if an item of equipment was impor- ted from abroad, all one got was that particular instrument. But if one built it oneself, an all-important lesson in expertise was learnt as well’.45 VI The industrial bias of Indian planning was tempered by a range of pro- grammes promoting agrarian uplift. On the morning of 2 October 1952 (Ma- hatma Gandhi’s birthday), the president of India inaugurated a nationwide series of community development programmes with abroad-cast over the ra- dio. Fifty-five projects were launched across India that day, these funded jointly by the governments of India and the United States. Among the schemes to be promoted by community development were roads and wells, cattle wel- fare and improved methods of cultivation. The projects were launched by ministers, chief ministers, and commis- sioners. These dignitaries helped remove earth for building roads and laid foundation stones for schools and hospitals. In Alipur village, twelve miles out of Delhi on the road to Karnal, Jawaharlal Nehru dug into the earth to help prepare a road. ‘With verve and vigour he plunged into the work, having taken his jacket off.’ His companion, the American ambassador, also carried some baskets of earth. Not everyone was as agile as these two. When a well- dressed official attempted to emulate the prime minister the villagers shouted ‘Sar parl! Sar parl’ – meaning, ‘Carry the baskets on your head, you fool, not with your hands!’ Speaking to the villagers, Nehru said that community de- velopment would bring about a rural revolution by peaceful means, not, as in other places, by the breaking of heads.46 How did these schemes work in practice? Two years after they began, the anthropologist S. C. Dube studied a community development project in west- ern Uttar Pradesh. He looked at the project from the viewpoint of the village- level worker (VLW), the government functionary mandated with taking new ideas to the peasants. By Dube’s account, these ‘agents of change’ certainly had energy and en- terprise. They got up at the crack of dawn, and worked all day. Among their duties were the demonstration to the villagers of the merits of new seeds and chemical fertilizers. These were tried on sample plots, the peasants looking on as the VLW explained scientific methods of dibbling. Different crops were sown, and different combinations of fertilizers used. The VLW also offered the villagers free angrezi khad (English manure) for use on their fields. It appears that the peasants of the UP were somewhat ambivalent about the new techniques. Here is a conversation between the VLW and a farmer known only by his initials, ‘MS’: VLW: What do you think of the new seed? MS: What can I think? If the government thinks it is good, it must be good. VLW: Do you think it is better than the local variety? MS: Yes. It resists disease much better. It can stand frost and rain, and there is more demand for it in the market. VLW: What about yield? MS: I cannot say. Some people say it is more, others say it is not. VLW: Some people say it is not as good in taste. MS: They are right. It is not half as good. If the roti [bread] is served hot it is more or less the same, but if we keep it for an hour or so it gets as tough as hide. No, it is not as good in taste. People say that we all get very weak if we eat this wheat. VLW: What is your experience? MS: Many more people suffer from digestive disorders these days. Our children have coughs and colds. Perhaps it is because of the new seed and sugar cane. It may be that the air has been spoilt by the wars. VLW: And what about the new fertilizer? MS: They increase the yield; there is no doubt about it. But they prob- ably destroy the vitality of the land and also of the grain.47 Indian peasants had mixed feelings about the new seeds and fertilizers. But they unambiguously welcomed fresh supplies of water. At the same time as S. C. Dube was studying community development in the UP, the British anthro- pologist Scarlett Epstein was living in Wangala, a village in southern Myso- re lately the beneficiary of canal irrigation. Till the water came, this was like any other hamlet in the interior Deccan, growing millet for its own consump- tion. With irrigation came new crops such as paddy and sugar cane. These were sold outside the village for a handsome return. Paddy gave a profit after expenses of Rs136 per acre; sugar cane as much as Rs980 per acre. These changes in local economics fostered changes in lifestyle as well. Before the canals arrived, the residents of Wangala wore scruffy clothes and rarely ven- tured outside the village. But ‘Wangala men now wear shirts and a number also wear dhotis; their wives wear colourful saris bought with money and they all spend lavishly on weddings. Wangala men pay frequent visits to Mandya [town], where they visit coffee shops and toddy shops; rice has replace dragi as their staple diet.’ These and other changes were made possible only by the extension of ir- rigation. As Epstein found, the coming of canal water was the turning point in the history of the village. Events of note, such as weddings, deaths and murders, were dated by whether they happened before or after irrigation.48 VII Assured irrigation and chemical fertilizers increased agricultural productivity. But they could not solve what was a fundamental problem of rural India: in- equality in access to land. Therefore, landless peasants were encouraged to settle in areas not previously under the plough. In the first decade of Independ- ence, close to half a million hectares of land were colonized, principally from malarial forests in the northern Terai, the central Indian hills, and the Western Ghats. Previously these areas had been inhabited only by tribes genetically resistant to malaria. With the invention of DDT it became possible for the state to clear the forests. These lands were naturally fertile, rich in calcium and po- tassium and organic matter (if poor in phosphates). In any case, there was no shortage of peasants who wanted them.49 A second way of tackling landlessness was to persuade large landholders to voluntarily give up land under their possession. This was a method pi- oneered by a leading disciple of Gandhi, Vinoba Bhave. In 1951 Bhave undertook a walking tour through the then communist-dominated areas of Telengana. In Pochempelli village, he persuaded a zamindar named Ramchandra Reddi to donate a hundred acres of land. This encouraged Bhave to make this a country wide campaign, known as the ‘Bhoodan movement. The saint trudged through the Indian heartland, giving speeches wherever he went. He must have walked perhaps 50,000 miles, while collecting in excess of 4 million acres. At first his mission was reckoned a success – like commu- nity development, a noble Gandhian alternative to violent revolution. But later assessments were less charitable. Like some other saints, Bhave preferred the grand gesture over humdrum detail. Critics pointed out that the bulk of the land donated to Bhave had never been distributed to the landless; over the years it had slowly returned to the hands of the original owners. Besides, much of the land that stayed under Bhoodan was rocky and sandy, unfit for cultiva- tion. In few places were the intended beneficiaries organized to work the land they had been gifted. On balance, the Bhoodan movement must be reckoned a failure, albeit a spectacular one.50 A third way of ending landlessness was to use the arm of the state. Land reform legislation had long been on the agenda of the Congress. After Independence, the different states passed legislation abolishing the zamindari system which, under the British, had bestowed effective rights of ownership to absentee landlords. The abolition of zamindari freed up large areas of land for redistribution, while also freeing tenants from cesses and rents previously exacted from them. Table 10.2 – Access to land in India, 1953–1960 Size class Percentage of holdings Percentage of total area (in hectares) 1953–4 1959–60 1953–4 1959–60 less than 1 56.15 40.70 5.58 6.71 1 to2 15.08 22.26 10.02 12.17 2 to4 14.19 18.85 18.56 19.95 4 to 10 10.36 13.45 29.22 30.47 more than 10 4.22 4.74 36.62 30.70 SOURCE: Nripen Bandyopadhyaya, ‘The Story of Land Reforms in Indian Planning’, in Amiya Kumar Bagchi, ed., Economy, Society and Polity: Es- says in the Political Economy of Indian Planning in Honour of Professor Bhabatosh Datta (Calcutta: Oxford University Press, 1988) After the end of zamindari, the state vested rights of ownership in their tenants. These, typically, came from the intermediate castes. Left unaffected were those at the bottom of the heap, such as low-caste labourers and share- croppers. Their well-being would have required a second stage of land re- forms, where ceilings would be placed on holdings, and excess land handed over to the landless. This was a task that the government was unable or un- willing to undertake.51 Even after a decade of planning, access to land remained very unequal. Table 10.2 indicates the percentages in five size classes of both the absolute number of holdings and the combined operational area of those holdings. If we define those who own less than four hectares as ‘small and mar- ginal’ farmers, and those who own more than four hectares as ‘medium and large farmers’, then Table 10.2 can be compressed into Table 10.3. This re- veals a slight diminution in inequality, with a 3.6 per cent drop in the numbers of small/marginal farmers and a 4.6 percent increase in the land held by them. The operative word is ‘slight’; so slight as to be almost imperceptible, and, in a democracy committed to the ‘socialistic pattern of society’, simply unac- ceptable. Table 10.3 – Changes in land inequality in India, 1953–60 Percentage of holdings Percentage of total area Class of farmer 1953–4 1959–60 1953–4 1959–60 Small and Marginal 85.42 81.81 34.16 38.83 Medium and Large 14.58 18.19 65.84 61.17 VIII The Nehru-Mahalanobis model emphasized heavy industrialization, state con- trol, and ultimately, a subsidiary role for the private sector. Behind it rested a wide consensus – and not merely in India. That in a complex modern economy the state must occupy the ‘commanding heights’ was a belief then shared by governments and ideologues all over the world. In the United States, purposive government intervention had brought the country out of the horrors of the Great Depression. In Britain, Keynesian eco- nomics had been energetically applied by the Labour government that came to power in 1945. An appreciation of the state as a positive agent in economic change was also heightened by the recent achievements of the Soviet Union. At the time of the first war Russia was a backward peasant nation; by the time of the second, a mighty industrial power. Particularly impressive were its mil- itary victories against Germany, which had a far longer history of technolo- gical and industrial development. For the Western democracies, the feats of the Soviets only underlined the importance of the state direction of economic development.52 To be sure, there were dissenters. In the West there was Friedrich Hayek, who advocated a retreat of the state from economic activity. His ideas, however, were treated with benign – and sometimes not-so-benign – con- tempt. (He could not even get a position in the Department of Economics in the University of Chicago, being placed instead in the ‘Committee on Social Thought’.) And in India there was B. R. Shenoy, the sole economist in the panel of experts who disagreed with the basic approach of the second five- year plan. As one commentator wrote, Shenoy ‘appeared to be committed to laissez-faire methods in so doctrinaire a manner that no one, outside certain business circles, took much note of his criticisms’.53 In truth, Shenoy’s arguments went beyond a mere belief in laissez faire. While he opposed the ‘general extension of nationalisation on principle’, his main criticism of the plan was that it was overambitious. It had, he thought, seriously overestimated the rate of savings in the Indian economy. The short- fall in funds would have to be made up by deficit financing, contributing to greater inflation.54 Another dissenter was the Chicago economist Milton Friedman. Visiting India in 1955 at the invitation of the government, he wrote a memorandum setting out his objections to the Mahalanobis model. He thought it too math- ematical: obsessed by capital–output ratios, rather than by the development of human capital. He deplored the emphasis in industrial policy on the two extremes – large factories that used too little labour and cottage industries that used too much. As he saw it, the ‘basic requisites’ of economic policy in a developing country were ‘a steady and moderately expansionary monet- ary framework, greatly widened opportunities for education and training, im- proved facilities for transportation and communication to promote the mobil- ity not only of goods but even more important of people, and an environment that gives maximum scope to the initiatives and energy of farmers, business- men, and traders’.55 Independently of Friedman, a young Indian economist had taken up one aspect of this critique – the neglect of education. The constitution mandated free and compulsory schooling for children up to the age of fourteen. But the sums allocated for this by the second plan, wrote B. V. Krishnamurti, were ‘absurdly low’. He called for a ‘substantial increase’ in the allotment for edu- cation, the budget being balanced by an ‘appropriate curtailment in the outlay on heavy industries’. Attention to detail was also crucial – to the enhancement of the social prestige of the schoolteacher, to higher salaries for them, to better buildings and playgrounds for the children. As Krishnamurti argued: A concerted effort on these lines to educate the mass of the population, specially in the rural areas, would undoubtedly have far-reaching benefits of a cumulatively expansionist character. This would greatly lighten the task of the Government in bringing about rapid economic development. For in a reasonable time, one could expect that the ignorance and iner- tia of the people would crumble and an urge to improve one’s material conditions by utilising the available opportunities would develop. If this were to happen, the employment problem would take care of itself. The people of the country would begin to move along the lines of those in the advanced democratic countries such as Great Britain and Switzerland.56 If B. V. Krishnamurti had been a professor in the centre of power, Delhi, rather than a lowly lecturer in Bombay, he might have got a hearing. In Friedman’s case, his high position and prestige were offset by foreign economists of equal distinction but of opposing views. He was to them what B. R. Shenoy was to Indian economists – a lone free-marketeer drowned out by a chorus of social democrats and leftists.57 A critique of a different kind came from the Marxists. They thought that the Mahalanobis model gave not too little importance to the market, but too much. The second plan, they felt, should have mandated a thoroughgoing pro- cess of nationalization, whereby the state would not merely start new indus- tries, but take under its wing the private firms already in operation. They wanted the working class to be involved with planning, on the model of the ‘people’s democracies’ of Eastern Europe.58 Then there were the Gandhians, who provided a precocious ecological critique of modern development. In the vanguard of this ‘early environmental- ism’ were two of the Mahatma’s closest disciples, J. C. Kumarappa and Mira Behn (Madeleine Slade). Through the 1950s they pungently dissented from the conventional wisdom on agricultural policy. They argued that small irriga- tion systems were more efficacious than large dams; that organic manure was a cheap and sustainable method of augmenting soil fertility (when compared to chemicals that damaged the earth and increased foreign debt); that forests should be managed from the point of view of water conservation rather than revenue maximization (by protecting natural multispecies forests rather than the monocultural stands favoured by the state). These specific criticisms were part of a wider understanding of the world of nature. As Mira Behn wrote in 1949: The tragedy today is that educated and moneyed classes are altogether out of touch with the vital fundamentals of existence – our Mother Earth, and the animal and vegetable population which she sustains. This world of Nature’s planning is ruthlessly plundered, despoiled and disorganized by man whenever he gets the chance. By his science and machinery he may get huge returns for a time, but ultimately will come desolation. We have got to study Nature’s balance, and develop our lives within her laws, if we are to survive as a physically healthy and morally decent species.59 One modern technology the Gandhians had deep reservations about were large dams. They thought them costly and destructive of nature. But, as Indians were soon finding out, dams were destructive of human community as well. By the early 1950s reports began appearing of the sufferings of those dis- placed by dams. In the summer of 1952, when the Hirakud authorities issued eviction notices to the residents of the 150 villages the project would sub- merge, they met with stiff resistance. A reporter on the spot concluded that ‘the prosperity of Hirakud will be built on the sacrifice of such people who are now being destituted [sic] by the Government of Orissa without compens- ation and rehabilitation’. Three years later, a similar tale surfaced of villagers in Himachal Pradesh, who had to make way for the reservoir of the Bhakra dam. A full year had passed since Nehru had inaugurated the power house; yet ‘complacency and indifference seem to be guiding the counsels of the Bhakra Control Board, particularly the Rehabilitation Committee’. Even ‘the basic question of compensation, and the where, why and how of it remains to be de- cided to the satisfaction of the people concerned’.60 IX The free-market critique; the human capital critique; the ecological critique – these make for fascinating reading today. But at the time these notes of dis- sent were scattered, and they were politically weak. There was then an over- whelming consensus in favour of a heavy industry-oriented, state-supported model of development. This was a consensus among intellectuals; no fewer than twenty-three of the twenty-four expert economists asked to comment on the Mahalanobis plan agreed with it in principle.61 This consensus was shared by large sections of the ruling class as well. In their Bombay Plan the leading industrialists had asked for an ‘enlargement of the positive functions of the State’. They approvingly quoted the Cambridge economist A. C. Pigou’s view that freedom and planning were entirely com- patible. Indeed, these big businessmen went so far as to state that ‘the distinc- tion between capitalism and socialism has lost much of its significance from a practical standpoint. In many respects there is now a large ground common to both and the gulf between the two is being steadily narrowed further as each shows signs of modifying itself in the direction of the other. In our view, no economic organization can function effectively or possess lasting qualities un- less it accepts as its basis a judicious combination of the principles associated with each school of thought’.62 For a final word on the romance and enchantment of Indian planning, we turn to an anonymous journalist covering one of its showpiece projects. This was Bokaro, site both of a thermal power project and a large reservoir. Visit- ing the place in September 1949, the reporter found that ‘Bokaro stood in the midst of barren, rocky land, overlooking the confluence of two sandy rivers. The only habitation there was the office of the Executive Engineer manned by half-a-dozen persons, without any living or other facilities. One could reach Bokaro only by jeep and we had to carry our own food.’ Three and a half years later the journalist went back to Bokaro to see the prime minister inaugurate the power plant and the dam. ‘What a different sight met my eyes’, he exulted. Approaching the Bokaro valley on a ‘first- class tarmac road’, he saw ‘the three sturdy stacks of the PowerStation against the grey background of the hills’. What had been ‘a dry river bed in 1949 has been turned into a fair-sized lake’ with a concrete barrage thrown across it. For those who worked in dam and plant, there was now ‘a modern residential area with tarred roads, electric lighting, a high school, hospital, filtered water supply and all the amenities one expects in the present day’.63 ‘Whenever I see these great engineering works’, wrote Jawaharlal Nehru, ‘I feel excited and exhilarated. They are visible symbols of building up the new India and of providing life and sustenance to our people’.64 It appears the excitement and exhilaration were felt by plenty of other Indians as well. THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS Some of these progressive movements have a great fascination for Nehru. He always likes to be looked upon as a modern; he wants to be a Picasso hung up in the Royal Academy, looking upon the classical forms around him with a supercilious air. D. F. KARAKA, journalist, 1953 It is a settled fact that every country and every nation has its own charac- ter. It is inborn and instinct with it. It cannot be changed. Shakespeare and Kalidas are both great poets and dramatists . . . India . . . could not pro- duce a Shakespeare [nor] similarly England a Kalidas. I ask the sponsors of the reform, with all force and self-confidence, where is the necessity of Europeanisation of Hindu Law?’ . . . In codifying it there is danger of hurting seriously the susceptibilities and devotional feelings of millions of people. Hindu lawyer, 1954 I THE FRENCH WRITER André Malraux once asked Jawaharlal Nehru what had been his ‘greatest difficulty since Independence’. Nehru replied: ‘Creating a just state by just means’. Then he added, ‘Perhaps, too, creating a secular state in a religious country’.1 Secularism was, indeed, an idea that underlay the very foundations of free India. The Indian national movement refused to define itself in religious terms. Gandhi insisted that the multiple faiths of India can and must co-exist peace- ably in a free nation. This was a belief shared by Gandhi’s most prominent fol- lower, Nehru, and by his acknowledged mentor, Gopal Krishna Gokhale. Congress nationalism suffered a body blow at Independence. Freedom came not, as Gandhi and his colleagues had hoped, to one nation, but to two. Secularism now faced afresh set of challenges. One pertained to the domain of 11 personal laws. In colonial times, the whole of India had come under a com- mon penal code, drafted in the 1830s by the historian Thomas Babington Ma- caulay. But there was no attempt to replace the personal laws of various sects and religions with a common civil code. Here, as the British saw it, the coloni- al state’s role was restricted to adjudicating between different interpretations of religious law. After Independence, among those favouring a common civil code were the prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, and the law minister, Dr B. R. Ambedkar. Both were of a modernist cast of mind, and both were trained in the Western legal tradition. For both, the reform of personal laws became an acid test of India’s commitment to secularism and modernization. II Article 44 of the Constitution of India reads: ‘The State shall endeavour to se- cure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.’ When this article was discussed in the Constituent Assembly, it provoked much agitation, particularly among Muslim members. During the two centur- ies of their rule, the British interfered little with personal laws; why could not the successor state follow their example? One member pointed out that ‘as far as the Mussalmans are concerned, their laws of accession, inheritance, mar- riage and divorce are completely dependent upon their religion’. A second felt that ‘the power that has been given to the state to make the civil code uni- form is in advance of the time’. A third believed that the clause contravened another clause in the constitution: the freedom to propagate and practise one’s religion.2 These arguments were forcefully refuted by B. R. Ambedkar. As he saw it, ‘if personal laws are to be saved, . . . in social matters we will come to a standstill’. In traditional societies, religion presumed to hold a ‘vast, expans- ive jurisdiction so as to cover the whole of life’. But in a modern democracy this licence had to be curtailed, if only ‘in order to reform our social system, which is so full of inequities, so full of inequalities, discriminations and other things, which conflict with our fundamental rights’. To assuage the misgiv- ings, Ambedkar said that the state might choose to apply a uniform civil code by consent, that is, only to those who chose voluntarily to submit to it.3 As it happened, during the last years of their rule the British had be- latedly initiated the framing of a uniform code for Hindus. This sought to re- concile the prescriptions of the two principal schools of law – the Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga – and their numerous local variations. A committee had been setup in 1941 chaired by Sir B. N. Rau, who was also to play a crucial role in drafting the Indian Constitution. The committee toured India, soliciting a wide spectrum of Hindu opinion on the changes they proposed. Their pro- gress was interrupted by the war, but by 1946 they had prepared a draft of a personal law code to be applied to all Hindus.4 That the Hindus were singled out was in part because they were the largest community, and in part because there was a vigorous reform move- ment among them. Mahatma Gandhi, in particular, had challenged the dis- criminations of caste and gender, by seeking the abolition of untouchability and bringing women into public life. Although there remained an influential orthodox section, modernist Hindus had campaigned strongly for laws that would make caste irrelevant and enhance the rights of women. In 1948 the Constituent Assembly formed a Select Committee to review the draft of a new Hindu code. It was chaired by B. R. Ambedkar, the law minister. The code drafted by the Rau Committee was revised by Ambedkar himself, and then subjected to several close readings of the Select Committee. Despite its name, the ‘Hindu’ Code Bill was to apply to Sikhs, Buddhists and Jains as well as all Hindu castes and sects. Introducing the new bill, Ambedkar told the Assembly that its aim was to ‘codify the rules of Hindu Law which are scattered in innumerable decisions of the High Courts and of the Privy Council, [and] which form a bewildering motley to the common man and give rise to constant litigation’. The codification had a dual purpose: first, to elevate the rights and status of Hindu women; second, to do away with the disparities and divisions of caste. Among the notable features of the proposed legislation were: 1. The awarding, to the widow and daughter, of the same share as the son(s) in the property of a man dying intestate (which in the past had passed only to his male heirs). Likewise, a Hindu woman’s estate, previ- ously limited, was now made absolute, to be disposed of as she wished. 2. The granting of maintenance to the wife who chose to live separately from the husband if he had a ‘loathsome disease’, was cruel to her, took a concubine, etc. 3. Abolition of the rules of caste and sub-caste in sanctifying a marriage. All marriages between Hindus would have the same sacramental as well as legal status, regardless of the castes to which the spouses belonged. An inter-caste marriage could now be solemnized in accordance with the customs and rites of either party. 4. Allowing either partner to file for and obtain divorce on certain grounds, such as cruelty, infidelity, incurable disease, etc. 5. Making monogamy mandatory. 6. Allowing for the adoption of children belonging to a different caste. These changes went very far in the direction of gender equity. Later, much later, feminist scholars were to argue that they did not go far enough, that they exempted agricultural properties from their provisions, for example, or that the advantages conferred on female heirs by the new laws were greater in the case of self-acquired property as compared to property that was inher- ited.5 But from the viewpoint of Hindu orthodoxy the changes had already gone far enough. They constituted radical departures from the main body of Hindu law, where the son had a much larger claim on his father’s property as compared to the wife and daughter, where marriage was considered a sacra- ment and hence indissoluble, where the man was allowed to take more than one wife, and where marriage was governed strictly by the rules of caste. In defending these changes, Ambedkar was at times rather defensive. Thus he argued that the Shastras, the Hindu holy texts, did not give the husband ‘an unfettered, unqualified right to polygamy’. The ‘right to marry a second time has been considerably limited by the [ancient law maker] Kautilya’. Again, the customary law of the various low castes, or shudras, had always allowed divorce. As for the woman’s right to property, some schools allowed her a quarter share in her father’s property; all Ambedkar had done was to ‘raise [the daughter] up in the share of heirs’, by making her share full and equal to that of the son.6 Ambedkar was here putting the best possible, or most liberal, spin on Hindu texts and traditions. But alternative interpretations were possible, and certainly more plausible. Not surprisingly, Ambedkar’s proposals provoked ‘loud denunciations’ from the orthodox, who viewed them as ‘a complete ab- rogation of the Hindu customs and traditions’, an unacceptable interference with the rules of caste and the traditional relations between the sexes.7 A doughty opponent of the bill was the Constituent Assembly’s own president, Rajendra Prasad. In June 1948, shortly after the Select Committee had been set up, Prasad warned the prime minister that to introduce ‘basic changes’ in personal law was to impose the ‘progressive ideas’ of a ‘micro- scopic minority’ on the Hindu community as a whole. Nehru answered that the Cabinet had declared itself in favour of the bill, that ‘personally, I am en- tirely in favour of the general principles embodied in it’. To scrap the legisla- tion now would be to give rise to the suspicion that the Congress was ‘a re- actionary and a very conservative body’; nor would it go down well ‘in the mind of foreigners outside India’. Prasad shot back that the opinions of the ‘vast bulk of [the] Hindu public’ were more important than the views of for- eigners.8 Within the Assembly there were other opponents as well. They stalled and thwarted the proceedings until Nehru, in high dudgeon, told them that to him the passing of the bill had become a matter of prestige. Prasad, in re- sponse, drafted a letter warning the prime minister that this would be ‘un- just and undemocratic’, as this ‘fundamental and controversial legislation’ had never been considered by the Indian electorate. Fortunately for him, Prasad consulted Vallabhbhai Patel before sending Nehru the letter. The timing is cru- cial here, for it was now December 1949, and soon the Congress would choose the first president of India from a shortlist that comprised Rajendra Prasad and C. Rajagopalachari. With this in view, Patel told Prasad not to send the prime minister his criticisms of the Hindu code, lest it ‘prejudice your position with- in the party’.9 So Prasad kept quiet (and was duly elected the first president of the Indi- an Republic). But outside the Council House the cries grew louder. Already, in March 1949, an All-India Anti-Hindu-Code-Bill Committee had been formed. This held that the Constituent Assembly had ‘no right to interfere with the personal laws of Hindus which are based on Dharma Shastras’. Sixty (male) members of the Delhi Bar issued a statement objecting to the codification of Hindu law, on the grounds that ‘the mass of the Hindus believe in the Divine Origin of their personal laws’. The Anti-Hindu-Code-Bill Committee was supported by conservative lawyers as well as by conservative clerics. The influential Shankaracharya of Dwarka issued an ‘encyclical’ against the proposed code. Religion, he said, ‘is the noblest light, inspiration and support of men, and the State’s highest duty is to protect it’. The Anti-Hindu-Code-Bill Committee held hundreds of meetings throughout India, where sundry swamis denounced the proposed legislation. The participants in this movement presented themselves as religious warriors (dharmaveer) fighting a religious war (dharmayudh). The Rashtriya Swayam- sevak Sangh threw its weight behind the agitation. On 11 December 1949, the RSS organized a public meeting at the Ram Lila grounds in Delhi, where speaker after speaker condemned the bill. One called it ‘an atom bomb on Hindu society’. Another likened it to the draconian Rowlatt Act introduced by the colonial state; just as the protests against that act led to the downfall of the British, he said, the struggle against this Bill would signal the downfall of Nehru’s government. The next day a group of RSS workers marched on the Assembly buildings, shouting ‘Down with Hindu code bill’ and ‘May Pan- dit Nehru perish’. The protesters burnt effigies of the prime minister and Dr Ambedkar, and then vandalized the car of Sheikh Abdullah. The leader of the movement against the new bill was one Swami Karp- atriji Maharaj. We know little of this swami’s antecedents, except that he was from north India and appeared to be knowledgeable in Sanskrit. His opposi- tion to the Bill was coloured and deepened by the fact that it was being piloted by Ambedkar. He made pointed references to the law minister’s caste, sug- gesting that a former Untouchable had no business meddling in matters nor- mally the preserve of the Brahmin. In speeches in Delhi and elsewhere, Swami Karpatri challenged Ambedkar to a public debate on his interpretations of the Shastras. To the law minister’s claim that the Shastras did not really favour polygamy, Swami Karpatri quoted Yagnavalkya: ‘If the wife is a habitual drunkard, a confirmed invalid, a cunning, a barren or a spendthrift woman, if she is bitter-tongued, if she has got only daughters and no son, if she hates her husband, [then] the hus- band can marry a second wife even while the first is living.’ The swami sup- plied the precise citation for this injunction: the third verse of the third chapter of the third section of Yagnavalkya’s smriti (scripture) concerning marriage. He did not, however, tell us whether the injunction also allowed the wife to take another husband if the existing one was a drunkard, bitter-tongued, a spend-thrift, etc. For Swami Karpatri, divorce was prohibited in Hindu tradition, while ‘to allow adoption of a boy of any caste is to defy the Shastras and to defy prop- erty’. Even by the most liberal interpretations, the woman’s inheritance was limited to one-eighth, not a half as Ambedkar sought to make it. The bill was altogether in violation of the Hindu scriptures. It had already evoked ‘terrible opposition’, and the government could push it through only at its peril. The swami issued a dire warning: ‘As is clearly laid down in the Dharmashastras, to forcibly defy the laws of God and Dharma very often means great harm to the Government and the country and both bitterly rue the obstinate folly.’10 III In December 1949, having agreed upon a constitution, the Constituent Assembly made way for a provisional Parliament, which was to be in place until the first general election. Through 1950 and 1951, Nehru and Ambedkar made several attempts to get the Hindu Code Bill passed into law. But the op- position was considerable, both within Parliament and outside it. To quote J. D. M. Derrett, ‘every argument that could be mustered against the project was garnered, including many that cancelled each other out’. The ‘offer of divorce to all oppressed spouses became the chief target of attack, and the cry that re- ligion was in danger was raised by many whose real objection to the Bill was that daughters were to have equal shares with sons’.11 Within the provisional Parliament, orthodox members claimed that the Hindu laws had stayed unchanged from time immemorial. ‘The rules of con- duct and duties of men in our country are determined by the Vedas’, said Ram- narayan Singh. Despite the challenges down the ages – posed by Buddhism, Islam and Christianity – ‘the Vedic religion did not perish’. . . [the] Vedic reli- gion is still there’. But now, complained Ramnarayan Singh, ‘we have Pandit Nehru’s administration whose representative Dr Ambedkar wants to abrogate with a single stroke all those rules which have existed since the beginning of the world’. Some parliamentarians argued that the government should frame and have passed an Indian code rather than a specifically Hindu one. ‘I do not be- lieve that only Hindu women are oppressed’, said Indra Vidyavachaspati. By passing the bill in its present form, the state would ‘give encouragement to [the] evil of communalism’. If it was not made applicable to all sections of the populations, insisted Vidyavachaspati, then ‘the feeling of communalism will arise and what should have been a boon will turn into a curse’. Other members were happy enough with the bill as it was. ‘While I ad- mire those who want to have one Civil Code for the whole of India’, said Thakur Das Bhargava, ‘I do not think that it would be a practical proposi- tion to have one Civil Code for Muslims, Christians, Jews, etc.’. For Muslim members had already expressed their opposition to any tampering with their personal code, which they believed to be the revealed word of Allah himself. To ask at this stage for a uniform code was seen as a stalling tactic, diverting attention from the reform so urgently required within the majority community. As Dr Ambedkar put it, ‘those who until yesterday were the greatest oppon- ents of this Code and the greatest champions of the archaic Hindu Law as it exists to-day’, now claimed that they were ‘prepared for an All-India Civil Code’. This was because they hoped that while it had already taken ‘four or five years to draft the Hindu Code [it] will probably take ten years to draft a Civil Code’. Ambedkar knew that while there were enough influential Hindus – such as Jawaharlal Nehru – who were behind progressive legislation, among the Muslims the liberal contingent was nowhere near as strong. The government, he said, could not be so ‘foolish’ as ‘not to realize the sentiments of different communities in this country’. That was why the code at present dealt only withtheHindus.12 Of course, not all Hindus were of the liberal party either. The reservations of the orthodox, as expressed in Parliament, were carried forward in the streets by the cadres of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. They brought batches of volunteers into New Delhi, to shout slogans against the Hindu Code Bill and court arrest. Among their larger aims were the dismemberment of Pakistan and the unseating of Jawaharlal Nehru – as they shouted, ‘Pakistan tod do’, ‘Nehru Hakumat Chhod Do’. The main speaker at these RSS-organized shows was usually Swami Karpatriji Maharaj. Addressing a meeting on 16 September 1951, the swami challenged the prime minister to a debate on the proposed bill. ‘If Pandit Nehru and his colleagues succeed in establishing that even one section of the proposed Hindu Code is in accordance with the Shastras’, said Karpatri, ‘I shall accept the entire Hindu Code’. The next day, in pursuance of this chal- lenge, the swami and his followers marched on Parliament. The police pre- vented them from entering. In the ensuing scuffle, reported a Hindu weekly, ‘police pushed them back [and] Swamiji’s danda [stick] was broken, which is like the sacred thread, [the] religious emblem of the sannyasis’.13 Coincidentally, just two days before Swami Karpatriji’s march, the pres- ident had written the prime minister along letter of protest against the bill. As in 1948 and 1949, now too Rajendra Prasad felt that the present Parliament, based like its predecessor on a restricted franchise, was ‘not competent to en- act a measure of such a fundamental nature’. The bill, argued the president, was ‘highly discriminatory’, for it applied to only one community, the Hindus. Either the same laws governing marriage and property should be applied to all Indians, or else the existing customary laws of the different communities should be left untouched. Prasad wrote ominously that ‘he proposed to watch the progress of the measure in Parliament from day to day’. If the bill was still passed, he would insist on his ‘right to examine it on its merits. . . before giv- ing assent toit’.14 Nehru wrote back saying that in his view there was ‘a very widespread expression of opinion in the country in favour of the Bill’. But the president’s opposition had him worried, for it presaged a possible stand-off between the government and the head of state. He showed Prasad’s letter to several experts on the constitution. They assured him that the president was bound to act with ‘the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers and cannot act independently of that advice’. As they saw it, the position of the president of India was even weaker than that of the British monarch.15 Despite this advice, Nehru chose not to challenge the president. In any case, the progress of the bill in the provisional Parliament had been painfully slow. An immense number of objections and amendments had been tabled. It took the better part of a year to have a mere four clauses passed. In the end ‘the session ended, the bill was virtually talked out, and it lapsed’.16 The man who was most hurt by this failure was the law minister. Dr Ambedkar had staked his reputation on the bill, meeting criticism and calumny with equal resolution. That Nehru had finally chosen to give in to the opposition pained him deeply. In October 1951 he resigned from the Union Cabinet. He intended to announce his decision in the House, but when the De- puty Speaker asked for a copy of his speech beforehand, he walked out in a huff and released it to the press instead. Ambedkar gave several reasons for his decision to resign. He had been in poor health, for one. For another, the prime minister had failed to repose adequate trust in him. Despite having a PhD in economics (from the London School of Economics, no less) he had been left out of discussions on planning and development. A third reason was his growing reservations about the gov- ernment’s foreign policy, particularly with regard to Kashmir. A fourth reas- on was that the condition of his fellow Scheduled Castes continued to be wretched. Despite the coming of political independence, and a constitution protecting their rights, they faced the ‘same old tyranny, the same old oppres- sion, the same old discrimination’. Ambedkar came in the end to the issue which had finally provoked him to resign. He had, he said, set his cap on having the Hindu Code Bill passed before the end of the Parliament. He had tried hard to convince the prime min- ister about the urgency of the matter. But Nehru did not give him the kind of support he had hoped for. Facing opposition within his own party, the prime minister, complained Ambedkar, had not ‘the earnestness and determination’ required to overcome it.17 IV In the first months of 1952 the recent debates on the Hindu Code Bill cast their shadow as India held its first general election. Feeling let down by the Congress, Dr Ambedkar had founded his own Scheduled Caste Federation in opposition to it. As for the prime minister, in his own constituency of Alla- habad he was opposed by a leader of the now notorious Anti-Hindu-Code-Bill Committee. This was Prabhu Dutt Brahmachari. He was an ascetic and celibate, to signal which he wore saffron. Brahmachari’s candidature was supported by the Jana Sangh, the Hindu Mahasabha and the Ram Rajya Parishad. His cam- paign was run on a single-item agenda – no tampering with Hindu tradition. He printed pamphlets detailing the prime minis attempts to interfere with that tradition, challenging him to an open debate on the subject.18 Nehru sensibly refused. He won his seat with a massive margin, while the Congress got a comfortable majority overall. Nehru saw this, in part, as a mandate for his campaign against communalism. Soon after the Parliament was convened he resurrected the Hindu Code Bill. Keeping the earlier protests in mind, the original bill was now broken up into several parts. There were separate bills dealing with Hindu marriage and divorce, Hindu minority and guardianship, Hindu succession, and Hindu adoptions and maintenance. These component parts retained the rationale and driving force of the original unified proposal. The main thrust was to make caste irrelevant to Hindus with regard to marriage and adoption, to outlaw polygamy, to allow divorce and dissolution of marriage on certain specified grounds and to greatly increase a woman’s share of her husband’s and her father’s property.19 The prime minister was in the vanguard of the pro-reform movement, telling Parliament that ‘real progress of the country means progress not only on the political plane, not only on the economic plane, but also on the social plane’. The British had allied themselves with ‘the most conservative sections of the community they could find’. The conjoining of tradition and colonial- ism meant that ‘our laws, our customs fall heavily on the womenfolk’. Thus ‘different standards of morality are applied to men and women’. Men were al- lowed more than one wife, but when a woman wished for a divorce she was challenged by men, only ‘because men happen to be in a dominant position. I hope they will not continue in that dominant position for all time.’ Hindu customs and laws were hypocritical as well as unjust. Women were urged to model themselves on mythic figures of devotion and fidelity but, said Nehru, ‘I do not seem to remember men being reminded in the same manner of Ramachandra and Satyavan, and urged to behave like them. It is only the women who have to behave like Sita and Savitri; the men may be- have as they like.’20 Nehru worked hard to convince his colleagues of the importance of these measures. He wrote to one of his senior ministers, a Brahmin who tended to- wards the orthodox, that ‘we have to remember that in the acknowledged so- cial code and practice of India, as it has existed thus far, there was no lack of moral delinquency as well as extreme unhappiness. There were two codes, one for the man and the other for the woman. The woman got the worst of it always.’ To a young first-time MP Nehru wrote that ‘we should concentrate on the passage through Parliament of the Marriage and Divorce Bills and the Succession Bill. These are the really important ones. The bills dealing with adoption and guardianship, etc. are relatively unimportant.’21 By now the Anti-Hindu-Code-Bill Committee had lost its momentum. After the 1952 election the names of Swami Karpatriji Maharaj and Prabhu Dutt Brahamachari do not appear in the newspapers or police records. There were no longer any protests on the streets, but there were still criticisms aplenty in Parliament. The orthodox MPs saw the new bills as designed to destroy Hindu culture. For them, the laws of Manu and Yagnavalkya were im- mutable and unchangeable, as relevant in 950 BC as in AD 1950.22 But there was also an opposition that was less vulgar and more con- sidered; representing what we might call Hindu conservatives rather than Hindu reactionaries. Consider thus the views of the distinguished historian Radha Kumud Mookerji. He felt that the new proposals, particularly the pro- visions allowing divorce, were against the very spirit of Hindu civilization . . . The Bill is inspired by the western view of life which attaches more value to the romance of marital relations and married life than to parenthood in which marriage attains its fruition. The Hindu system conceives of parenthood as something that is permanent, unchangeable, and inviolable . . . The Bill seeks to change popular psychology as to the sanctity of marriage and family and loosen the ties of family as the very foundations of society. It thinks more of husband and wife than the father and mother in whom they are to be per- manently merged to protect the child and the future of the race.23 This argument did not go uncontested. A woman member felt that ‘the effect of a broken home is less injurious than that of a disharmonious home. Chil- dren are of a very receptive mind and the scenes that they may see of neglect and quarrel between the parents . . . are bound to leave their mark. If ‘the home has lost peace’, remarked another member, there was no point ‘forcing [husband and wife] to live together’; it was better to allow ‘separation in a re- spectable fashion’.24 In the Lok Sabha the opposition to the reforms was led by the brilliant Hindu Mahasabha lawyer N. C. Chatterjee. If this was indeed a secular state, argued Chatterjee, what was the need for a ‘Hindu’ Marriage and Divorce Act? Why not make the same law apply for all citizens? Thus, if the govern- ment honestly believed in the virtues of monogamy, that ‘this is a blessing and polygamy is a curse, then why not rescue our Muslim sisters from that curse and from that plight? ‘You have not the courage’, Chatterjee told the law min- ister, ‘to be logical and to be consistent.’25 The socialist J. B. Kripalani likewise felt that by prescribing monogamy only for the Hindus, the government was being hypocritical. ‘You must bring it also for the Muslim community,’ said Kripalani. ‘Take it from me that the Muslim community is prepared to have it but you are not brave enough to do it.’ But his own wife, the Congress MP Sucheta Kripalani, thought that the Muslims were not yet ready. For ‘we know the recent past history of our coun- try. We know what trouble we have had over our minority problem. That is why I think the Government today is not prepared to bring one Uniform Civil Code. But I hope the day will soon come in the future when we shall be able to have one.’26 The election of 1952 had returned to Parliament an array of articulate and confident women Congress MPs. These, naturally, saw the opposition to the legislation as the work of reactionaries. Subhadra Joshi, speaking in Hindi, launched abroad side against the custom of arranged marriages, which virtu- ally sold women into sharm ki zindagi, a life of shame and degradation. Shiv- rajvati Nehru noted that, while male politicians talked grandly of economic and political reform, they were not willing to make a single change in the sphere of social life and custom. In Hindu society the man was free and sov- ereign (purn swatantra); but the woman was bonded – to him. Even now, the husband was prone to treat his wife as a pair of slippers on his feet, to be dis- carded at will.27 In support of the reforms were several Scheduled Caste members, who knew better than anyone else how Hindu ‘custom’ masked a multitude of sins. One MP said that if the orthodox had their way, they would start amending the Constitution so as to do away with all the mischief done by this Congress Government, and certain new fundamental rights will be added. The first of them will be that all Hindu women will have the wonderful and glorious right of burning themselves on the funer- al pyres of their husbands. The second fundamental right would be that the cow will be declared a divine being, . . . and all Indians, including Muslims, Christians and so on will be compelled to worship the cow.28 The communists, for their part, thought the new laws were not radical enough. In the Lok Sabha, B. C. Das termed them ‘a mild, moderate attempt at social reform with all the hesitancy and timidity characteristic of all social meas- ures sponsored by this Government’. Still, those who opposed this ‘moder- ate measure’ had ‘seventeenth-century minds’. In the Rajya Sabha, Bhupesh Gupta noted the delay in introducing the legislation owing to the fact that ‘the Congress Party . . . functions on many occasions like a Rip Van Winkle’.29 Finally, one must take account of those Muslim members who were ef- fusive in their thanks to government. One, speaking in Hindustani, praised it for keeping their laws intact and not allowing the slightest change in it. Anoth- er thanked the government ‘for showing their great consideration to the views and the feelings of the Muslim community, and for having exempted them from the operations of this [Marriage] Bill, because there is the personal law for them, based on, and part of, their religion, and they hold religion as the most sacred and valuable thing in their life’.30 V After a bruising battle extending over nearly ten years, B. R. Ambedkar’s Hindu Code Bill was passed into law; not, as he had hoped, in one fell swoop, but in several instalments: the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 and the Hindu Succession, Minority and Guardianship, and Adoptions and Maintenance Acts of 1956. These acts were piloted through Parliament by the new law minister, H. V. Pataskar. He lacked both the stature of his predecessor and his scholar- ship. Once, when he suggested that the Hindu sacramental marriage permit- ted divorce, N. C. Chatterjee remarked that there was no basis for that state- ment, adding: ‘If Shri Pataskar had sat for a Hindu Law examination in any University he would have been ploughed and he would have got zero.’31 This might have been accurate, but was anyway irrelevant. For, as one dissenter recognized, the new bills constituted a ‘direct attack on the Hindu shastras and Hinducustoms’.32 The right of a woman to choose her partner or to inherit property were ‘un-Hindu’; but not undemocratic, since the men had those rights all along. As Pataskar observed, the new laws were based on the constitutional recognition of ‘the dignity of person, irrespective of any distinc- tion of sex’.33 Another member of the Congress Party put it more eloquently. Women must have the right to choose (and discard) their husbands, he said, because ‘we [Indians] were fighting for freedom. After liberating our country, our motherland, it is our responsibility to liberate our mothers, our sisters, and our wives. That will be the greatest culmination of the freedom that we have at- tained.’34 Towards that end the new laws were indeed a notable contribution. Sixty million Hindu women came under its purview. But the changes were signific- ant in moral as well as numerical terms. As a leading American expert on In- dian law has written, this was a ‘wholesale and drastic reform’ which ‘entirely supplants the shastra as the source of Hindu law’. A leading British scholar of the subject goes further: ‘For width of scope and boldness of innovation’, he says, the series of acts considered here ‘can be compared only with the Code Napoléon.’35 The radical changes in the Hindu law pertaining to marriage and property were principally the work of two men: Jawaharlal Nehru and B. R. Ambedkar. Sadly, in the last, crucial stages of the struggle Ambedkar was a bystander. Having failed to win his seat in the direct elections to Parliament in 1952, he then entered the Upper House. There he observed, silent, as the bills were discussed and passed between 1954 and 1956.36 He was already a very sick man, with chronic diabetes and complications thereof, and in December 1956 he passed away. His sometime colleague Jawaharlal Nehru spoke in tribute in Parliament. Ambedkar, said the prime minister, would be remembered above all ‘as a symbol of the revolt against all the oppressive features of Hindu so- ciety’. But he ‘will be remembered also for the great interest he took and the trouble he took over the question of Hindu law reform. I am happy that he saw that reform in a very large measure carried out, perhaps not in the form of that monumental tome that he had himself drafted, but in separate bits.’37 This was a generous tribute, especially when we consider the bitterness that lay behind Ambedkar’s resignation in 1951. Then, Ambedkar thought that Nehru was too weak to fight the opposition within and outside his party. From his point of view the prime minister was going too slowly, but, of course, from the point of view of the orthodox Hindu he was going too fast. In 1949 and 1950, when the bill was first introduced, Nehru was not even in effective con- trol of the Congress. It was only after Vallabhbhai Patel’s death that he really took charge, overcoming the conservatives in the Congress and leading his party to a convincing victory in the general election. With the party, and coun- try, now behind him, he was prepared to introduce, and steer through, the le- gislation once proposed by Ambedkar.38 Nehru was determined to effect changes in the laws of his fellow Hindus, yet prepared to wait before dealing likewise with the Muslims. The aftermath of Partition had left the Muslims who remained in India vulnerable and con- fused. At this stage, to tamper with what they considered hallowed tradition – the word of Allah himself – would make them even less secure. Thus, when he was asked in Parliament why he had not brought in a uniform civil code immediately, Nehru answered that, while such a code had his ‘extreme sym- pathy’, he did not think that ‘at the present moment the time is ripe in India for me to try to push it through. I want to prepare the ground for it and this kind of thing is one method of preparing the ground.’39 Others viewed this caution more cynically. As Dr Shyama Prasad Mookerjee pointed out in the provisional Parliament, ‘it is nobody’s case that monogamy is good for Hindus alone or for Buddhists alone or for Sikhs alone’. Why not then have a separate bill prescribing monogamy for all cit- izens? Having asked the question, Dr Mookerjee supplied this answer: ‘I am not going to tread on this question because I know the weaknesses of the pro- moters of the bill. They dare not touch the Muslim minority. There will be so much opposition coming from throughout India that government will not dare to proceed with it. But of course you can proceed with the Hindu community in any way you like and whatever the consequences may be.’ At this point C. Rajagopalachari interjected: ‘Because we are the com- munity’.40 ‘We’ were the Congress, particularly its reformist wing, represen- ted by Nehru and rather ably by Rajagopalachari as well. One can appreci- ate their hesitancy to take on people of faiths other than their own. For it had taken them the better part of ten years to ‘proceed with the Hindu community in any way they liked; that is in away that would help bring their personal laws somewhat in line with modern notions of gender justice.41 SECURING KASHMIR Do we believe in a national state which includes people of all religions and shades of opinion and is essentially secular. . ., or do we believe in the religious, theocratic conception of a state which considers people of other faiths as something beyond the pale? This is an odd question to ask, for the idea of a religious or theocratic state was given up by the world some centuries ago and has no place in the mind of the modern man. And yet the question has to be put in India today, for many of us have tried to jump back to a past age. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU I THE REFORM OF PERSONAL laws was one test of Indian secularism. Another and greater test was with regard to the future of Kashmir. Could a Muslim majority state exist, without undue fuss or friction, in a Hindu-dominated but ostensibly ‘secular’ India? As we have seen in Chapter 4, by 1949 Sheikh Abdullah was in firm con- trol of the administration of Jammu and Kashmir. But the status of the territory was still under dispute. The United Nations had called for a plebiscite and was trying to get India and Pakistan to meet the conditions for holding it. In February 1950 the UN Security Council asked both countries to with- draw their armies from the state. As before, both sides stalled. India asked for the Pakistanis to take their troops out first while Pakistan demanded that the National Conference government be removed from office. India had begun to regret taking the matter to the United Nations in the first place. By 1950 it was quite prepared to hold on to its part of the disputed state, and let Pakistan take the hindmost. The Indian Constitution, which came into effect in January 1950, treated Kashmir as part of the Indian Union. However, it guaranteed the state a certain autonomy; thus Article 370 specified that the president would consult the state government with regard to subjects other than defence, foreign affairs, and communications.1 12